Logo: Tobacco In Australia: Facts and Issues

Button: GO (Submit form)
            Next Chapter
Home » Chapter 2: Consumption » 2.0 Introduction

2.0 Introduction
 Show / hide chapter menu
A great deal of data exists about consumption of tobacco in Australia. However, little of it is available in a consistent format covering extended periods of time, and much of it is difficult to interpret.
The Australian Tobacco Marketing Advisory Committeei compiled very useful data on tobacco production, processing, manufacturing and duty clearances in the reports it released annually from 1966, but these ceased when the organisation was wound up in 1994.1
Data have been collected by the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) for more than a century on the quantity and value of numerous commodities manufactured in factories around the country. Information about tobacco products manufactured in Australia was published in a variety of formats over the years.2 Data on the quantities of tobacco manufactured were included in reports published monthly until 1997,3 in quarterly reports until June 2004,4 and then electronically to 2006.5 However this source of data by itself was of limited usefulness as an estimate of consumption because it included tobacco products bound not for home consumption but for export and excluded tobacco products imported to Australia for local consumption. In any case estimates for manufactured tobacco products are no longer included in ABS publications.5
Data on the amount (weight) of tobacco product on which excise and customs duty was paid were included in various yearbooks and other publications produced by the ABS (formerly the Commonwealth Bureau of Census and Statistics) over the years,6 including overseas trade bulletins published until 1977.7 ii Data on excise and customs duty payments on tobacco products between 1978–79 and 2002–03 have been requested and purchased by researchers on various occasions from the ABS International Trade Section.8,9 The ABS ceased compiling data on excise collections in 2003. Details about tobacco excise duty now must be requested from the Australian Taxation Office, which is less well equipped than the ABS to deal with requests from researchers (T Dickinson, letter to the author 2003). The Australian Taxation Office has published reports on revenue collected on tobacco products,10,11 but not so consistently on the amount of each type of tobacco product dutied. Apart from these official sources of data relevant to production and sales of tobacco products, it is also possible to generate estimates of tobacco consumption from data collected in various surveys.
Triennial household surveys conducted for Cancer Council Victoriaiii between 1974 and 200112–21 asked smokers to estimate the number of packets of cigarettes they purchased each week, however the estimates generated in these surveys may have become less accurate over time as more and more smokers came to be using larger and large pack sizes. Surveys conducted every three years to evaluate the impact of Australia's National Drug Strategy22,23 iv also attempted to assess consumption, but the questions asked varied somewhat over the years. In the early surveys (up to 1998) smokers were asked to nominate within specified ranges the number of cigarettes they smoked each day. These categories were too broad to enable meaningful analysis of trends over time. Later surveys24–27 provide what appear to be more reliable and consistent estimates asking:
daily cigarette smokers (roll-your-own and/or factory-made) how many they smoked each day
those who smoked at least once per week how many they smoked each week and
monthly smokers how many they smoked each month.
Additional surveys conducted for the Commonwealth Department of Health and Ageing to evaluate the National Tobacco Campaign between 1997 and 200528–31 asked smokers to estimate numbers of cigarettes smoked each day. The National Tobacco Campaign surveys provided a wealth of useful data on reported consumption among various categories of smoker; however this survey provides information only on trends over a very short period. It should be noted that estimates of consumption by smokers based on self-report data tend to be significantly lower than those calculated using duty payments and other objective sources.
The ABS Household Expenditure Survey, first conducted in 198432 then every five33–37 and now six38 years,39 also provides several interesting snapshots of households with any expenditure on tobacco, generating data about the number and characteristics of such households and the average reported amounts spent. Quarterly and annual national accounts data provide estimates of the amount spent nationally on tobacco products.40 Because the price of tobacco products has increased greatly over time41–see Chapter 13, Section 13.3–both household expenditure and national accounts data need to be carefully re-adjusted to take account of changing prices if they are to be used as estimates of consumption.
From time to time, various business-sector organisations compile statistics concerning production and sales of cigarettes based on a mixture of official data and figures obtained from tobacco companies. International databases such as ERC Statistics International Plc's tobacco market reports42 and Euromonitor International's Global Market Information Database43 are extremely interesting. However generally data are available only to those who subscribe to the data service. Little is documented about sources, assumptions and estimation techniques underlying figures included in these databases, so it is difficult to know whether data are being collected in a consistent way from year to year.
Figures on tobacco use over time are much more meaningful if adjusted for population numbers. Figures may be divided by the number of persons in the population over 12, 13, 14, 15, 16 or 17 years of age. Smoking rates in those under 15 years of age are generally very low in most countries. Consumption per person 15 years and over is the most common indicator of per capita consumption internationally.
All the data known to be publicly available relevant to estimating trends in tobacco consumption in Australia are set out in the tables and figures in this chapter. The limitations of each data set are discussed further in Section 2.6. Unfortunately no single source provides a valid and reliable and consistently measured estimate of tobacco consumption over the entire 50-year period since health authorities first raised the alarm about the dangers of smoking. As discussed in Section 2.7 and Section 2.8, estimating consumption and making comparisons between countries and within countries over time is increasingly difficult as illicit tobacco sales vary widely between countries and over time. Notwithstanding these difficulties and limitations, the best estimates of recent consumption available at the time of writing are set out in Section 2.9. Factors thought to be driving reductions in consumption are set out in Section 2.10.

Health Impact
Trends in Adolescent Tobacco Use
Risk & Protective Factors
Strategies & Approaches
Tips for Parents
Need Help?
Approximately 4.7 million middle and high school students were current tobacco users in 2015.[1] Although tobacco use by adolescents has declined substantially in the last 40 years, nearly one in 17 high school seniors was a daily smoker in 2015.[2] Substantial racial/ethnic and regional differences in smoking rates exist. Among high school students, white teens are more likely to smoke than are their black or Hispanic peers.[3] Smoking rates are typically higher in nonmetropolitan areas, and in the Southern and Midwestern regions of the country.[4]
 

Figure 1: 30 Day Prevalence of Daily Use of Cigarettes, by Grade, 1976-2015



Source: Johnston, L.D., O’Malley, P.M., Miech, R.A., Bachman, J.G., & Schulenberg, J.E. (2016). Monitoring the Future national survey results on drug use, 1975-2015: Overview, key findings on adolescent drug use. Ann Arbor, MI: Institute for Social Research, The University of Michigan. Retrieved June 3, 2016, from http://www.monitoringthefuture.org/pubs/monographs/mtf-overview2015.pdf.

Office of Adolescent Health
See the data »
 
Products used by adolescents include cigarettes (both store-bought and hand-rolled), cigars, pipes, hookahs, smokeless tobacco, and newer oral products such as e-cigarettes, pouches, lozenges, strips, and sticks:

Tobacco cigarettes: Nearly 90 percent of adult smokers began smoking before age 18 and 11 percent of high school seniors reported smoking in the last month.[2] Learn more.
Smokeless tobacco: Use of smokeless tobacco among adolescents is less common than cigarette smoking. Learn more.
Hookahs: Hookahs are no safer than other forms of tobacco smoking and may deliver even higher levels of toxic substances than. Learn more.
Flavored little cigars: Of middle and high school students who used tobacco products in 2014, more than 60 percent smoked flavored little cigars.[5] Learn more.

E-cigarettes: From 2011 to 2015, the percentage of 12th-grade students who had ever used an e-cigarette increased from 4.7 to 16 percent.[2] For the first time in 2014, a trend that continued in 2015, more teenagers used e-cigarettes than smoked cigarettes.[1],[2] Learn more.
Many adolescents use more than one tobacco product. In 2015, 13 percent of high school students and three percent of middle school students reported the current use of two or more types of tobacco.

Tobacco Cigarettes
About one out of every three high school seniors reports ever having smoked a cigarette in 2015.[2] However, in 2015, almost one in 17 12th graders (six percent) was a regular, daily smoker—a number that has declined dramatically from its recent peak of 25 percent in 1997 (see Figure 1).[2] Cigarette smoking by adolescents (measured as use in the past month) in grades eight, 10, and 12 combined has declined by more than half since its most recent peak in the late 1990s. In 2014, about one in 17 adolescents (seven percent) reported smoking cigarettes in the past month, compared with more than one in four (28 percent) in 1996-97 (see Figure 2).[2]

Figure 2: Percent of adolescents who report smoking cigarettes in the past month, 1996-1997, 2014, and 2015



Source: Johnston, L.D., O’Malley, P.M., Miech, R.A., Bachman, J.G., & Schulenberg, J.E. (2016). Monitoring the Future national survey results on drug use, 1975-2015: Overview, key findings on adolescent drug use. Ann Arbor, MI: Institute for Social Research, The University of Michigan. Retrieved June 3, 2016, from http://www.monitoringthefuture.org/pubs/monographs/mtf-overview2015.pdf.

Office of Adolescent Health
See the data »
Although we may not know all of the factors playing a role in this decline, the 1990s were years when funds from tobacco companies (the result of a legal settlement between the tobacco companies and the federal government) supported a number of local, state, and national anti-tobacco campaigns.[7] In addition, during this time, new restrictions on tobacco advertising were instituted, smoke-free laws and policies were widely implemented, and additional taxes were placed on cigarettes, which inhibited demand.[8] However, after 2002, most states did not allocate funds to maintain the proven anti-tobacco efforts shown to deter youth tobacco use.[9]

Smokeless tobacco
Use of smokeless tobacco products (e.g., snuff, chewing tobacco) among adolescents is less common than cigarette smoking. However, adolescents increased their use of smokeless tobacco between 2008 and 2010. Rates remained fairly steady from 2010 to 2015.[2] Although 6 percent of 12th graders used smokeless tobacco in the past 30 days (in 2015), this is not as high as during the mid-1990s (when use peaked at 12 percent in 1995). Although adolescents increased their use of smokeless tobacco between 2008 and 2011, this trend has slowed and even reversed, particularly for older adolescents (see Figure 3).[2] For smokeless tobacco use, the highest rates of initiation are in the 7th through 11th grades. Although approximately equal proportions of male and female adolescents smoke tobacco cigarettes, users of smokeless tobacco products are nearly all male.[2]

Figure 3: Percent of students who report using smokeless tobacco in the last 30 days, by grade, 1993-2015



Source: Johnston, L.D., O’Malley, P.M., Miech, R.A., Bachman, J.G., & Schulenberg, J.E. (2016). Monitoring the Future national survey results on drug use, 1975-2015: Overview, key findings on adolescent drug use. Ann Arbor, MI: Institute for Social Research, The University of Michigan. Retrieved June 3, 2016, from http://www.monitoringthefuture.org/pubs/monographs/mtf-overview2015.pdf.

Office of Adolescent Health
See the data »
Hookahs
Hookahs (water pipes) are popular among some adolescents and are typically used in groups and sometimes in "hookah cafés." When used in groups, the hookah mouthpiece is passed around from person to person. Hookahs are no less addictive than other forms of tobacco smoking, and are at least as toxic as cigarette smoking.[10]

A typical hookah smoking session is one hour, during which the user inhales 100 to 200 times the amount of smoke they would inhale from a single conventional cigarette. [11] Because users smoke for a prolonged period of time, they may absorb more of the nicotine and toxic chemicals associated with cigarette smoking.[11] However, the dangers of hookah smoking are not well known among some adolescents. [12] Analysis of a national survey found that 24 percent of those ages 18 to 24 believed that hookahs were less harmful than smoking cigarettes.[12]

Older teens have increased their use of hookahs in recent years. Between 2010 and 2015, the percentage of high school seniors who had used a hookah in the last year increased from 17 to 20 percent.[2] Among adolescents and young adults, hookah use is highest among those ages 19-20, and those who live in cities. It is less common in suburban and rural areas.[10]

E-Cigarettes
Electronic cigarettes, or e-cigarettes, are battery-powered devices designed to deliver nicotine, flavor, and other chemicals. E-cigarettes heat a liquid containing highly addictive nicotine and other chemicals to become an aerosol that is then inhaled by the user. The variety of flavors available, such as strawberry, cinnamon, and chocolate, are a primary reason for use among young e-cigarette users.[13]

Prior to 2016, e-cigarettes not marketed for therapeutic purposes were unregulated by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). This changed with a new rule that expanded the FDA’s authority. The percent of high school seniors who had used an e-cigarette in the past 30 days increased from 1.5 percent in 2010 to 16 percent in 2015.[2],[6]

The same trend is observed in younger adolescents – use among 8th grade students also more than doubled (in 2015, 10 percent had used one in the past 30 days). Overall, among younger adolescents (those in 8th and 10th grades), more than twice as many reported using e-cigarettes than those who reported smoking cigarettes in 2015. This is less true for older adolescents and young adults; the discrepancy may be due to the relatively recent emergence of e-cigarettes.[2]

The parallel use of e-cigarettes with conventional cigarettes is also common. In 2014, approximately one out of four 8th and 10th grade students who used an e-cigarette in the past 30 days had also smoked a conventional cigarette; looking at those in 12th grade, that figure rises to more than half.[2]

There is concern that e-cigarettes represent a gateway to the use of traditional cigarettes and other tobacco products. Eighth grade students who use e-cigarettes are 10 times more likely than their peers who do not use e-cigarettes to eventually smoke tobacco cigarettes. This trend continues to a slightly lesser degree for older adolescents. Tenth and 12th grade students who use e-cigarettes are eight and six times more likely, respectively, than their peers to smoke tobacco cigarettes. This suggests that youth who use e-cigarettes are likely to become tobacco cigarette smokers as they age.[14]

Adolescent use of e-cigarettes is becoming increasingly common.[15] An emerging trend among adolescents is to use e-cigarettes to vaporize liquid marijuana or hash oil, which contain concentrated THC (tetrahydrocannabinol), the principal psychoactive ingredient in marijuana. This practice can produce a higher-potency high that can be damaging during crucial years in the brain’s development.

Other Oral Tobacco Products
Newer forms of oral tobacco products – pouches, lozenges, strips, snus, and sticks – are also cause for concern. Most of these are designed to dissolve in the user's mouth, and are offered in candy-like flavors; however, they all contain potent toxins that can lead to cancer and other serious diseases. Unfortunately, there are currently no reliable data on how many adolescents use these newer products.

Trends in the prevalence of smoking in Portugal: a systematic review
Helena CarreiraEmail author, Marta Pereira, Ana Azevedo and Nuno Lunet
BMC Public Health201212:958
DOI: 10.1186/1471-2458-12-958©  Carreira et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. 2012
Received: 29 June 2012Accepted: 22 October 2012Published: 8 November 2012
Open Peer Review reports
Abstract

Background
Understanding the dynamics of smoking at the population level is essential for the planning and evaluation of prevention and control measures. We aimed to describe trends in the prevalence of smoking in Portuguese adults by sex, age-group and birth cohort.

Methods
PubMed was searched from inception up to 2011. Linear regression was used to assess differences in prevalence estimates according to the type of population sampled, and to estimate time trends of smoking prevalence considering only the results of studies on nationally representative samples of the general population.

Results
Thirty eligible studies were identified. There were statistically significant differences in the prevalence estimates according to the types of population sampled in the original studies. Between 1987 and 2008, the prevalence of smoking increased significantly among women aged ≤ 70 years; the steepest increase was observed in those aged 31–50 and 51–70 years (from 4.6% and 0.1% in 1988, respectively, to 16.4% and 4.5% in 2008, respectively). The prevalence of smoking increased in all birth cohorts, except for those born before 1926. In the same period, among men, smoking decreased in all age-groups, with steepest declines in those aged ≤ 30 years (from 41.8% in 1988 to 28.8% in 2008) and those aged ≥ 71 years (from 15.1% in 1988 to 4.6% in 2008). The prevalence of smoking declined among men of all birth cohorts.

Conclusions
This study provides robust evidence to place Portuguese women at stage II and men at the later stages of the tobacco epidemic.

Keywords

Epidemiology Portugal Smoking Trends
Background

Smoking is the main preventable cause of premature death [1]. In 2004, it caused nearly 5 million deaths worldwide, accounting for approximately 25% and 7% of the mortality among adult European men and women, respectively [2]. In Portugal, in 2005, it was estimated that 18% of the deaths in men and 5% in women were attributable to smoking, accounting for more than 70 thousand disability-adjusted life years [3].

The most comprehensive data on smoking in Portugal comes from the four National Health Surveys [4, 5, 6, 7] and from several Eurobarometer surveys [8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14]. However, most of the latter did not provide sex- and age-specific estimates, which are essential to plan, monitor and evaluate the impact of prevention and control measures. Other studies assessed smoking behaviours in different calendar years, mainly from smaller regional samples recruited across the country, but the usefulness of these estimates has not been systematically addressed before.

A general model for the tobacco epidemic is widely accepted [15], though not all countries followed the same pattern as the ones used to formulate this model a few decades ago [16]. Country-specific data on the patterns of smoking at a population level are, therefore, necessary to understand its dynamics in each setting.

We conducted a comprehensive systematic review of studies that quantified the prevalence of smoking in Portuguese adults. Our specific aims were to compare the estimates obtained from studies that evaluated populations with different characteristics and to estimate the trends in the prevalence of smoking in Portugal, by sex, age-group and birth cohort.

Methods

Search strategy
We searched PubMed from inception up to January 2011, to identify original studies and review articles addressing the distribution of smoking in samples of the Portuguese adult population. The detailed search expression is presented in the systematic review flowchart (Additional file 1: Figure S1). This is a comprehensive search expression that includes terms directly related with smoking behaviours (“smoking”, “smoke”, “tobacco”, “cigarette”), as well as with other cardiovascular risk factors (hypertension, obesity, dyslipidaemia, diabetes, physical inactivity). The latter were also included because smoking is frequently associated with other behaviours with potential impact in human health [17, 18], and therefore reports with primary objectives not directly related with the assessment of smoking behaviours may also provide data of interest for this review, as secondary results. The reference lists of the review articles addressing the distribution of cardiovascular risk factors were screened to identify potentially eligible original reports. Additionally, we searched for reports that are by nature not suitable for indexation in journal databases (e.g. Eurobarometer study).

Eligibility criteria and screening of reference lists
Two reviewers independently evaluated the studies in three consecutive steps, following predefined criteria, to determine the eligibility of each report. The first two steps relied on the same criteria. In step 1, the exclusion of irrelevant studies was decided by considering only the title and abstract; when the abstract of a particular article was not available, the article was selected for evaluation in step 2, except when the title unequivocally presented information for exclusion (e.g. case report, studies of risk factors in a specified population). The full text of studies selected for step 2 were then evaluated to decide on their eligibility. The studies selected for step 3 were re-evaluated to determine their adequacy for extraction of relevant data.

The criteria for exclusion of studies were the following: reports not written in Portuguese, English, Spanish, French or Italian; studies not involving humans (e.g. in vitro or animal research); editorials, reviews or comments; reports not providing data specifically for Portuguese subjects; studies not evaluating adult populations; studies in which sample selection was dependent of at least one cardiovascular risk factor (hypertension, obesity, dyslipidaemia, diabetes or physical inactivity) and therefore participants could not represent the general population regarding the prevalence of smoking (e.g. subjects with diabetes, athletes, sedentary elderly); insufficient characterization of the methods (e.g. not specifying the region where the sample was assembled); not presenting sex-specific data on smoking. We did not exclude from the systematic review the studies presenting data not stratified by age, although these were not eligible for all data synthesis.

When more than one report referred to the same study, we considered the one providing data for the largest sample or, when the sample was the same, we used the source presenting the results with more detail, although any of these reports could be used to obtain information on the study characteristics.

The disagreements between the independent assessments of the reviewers were resolved by consensus or after discussion with a third researcher.

Data extraction
Two investigators independently evaluated the selected studies to extract the following data for sample characterization: sex; age; sample size; type of population (general population, university students, occupational groups, users of primary health care centers or volunteers); sampling strategy (probability or non probability sampling); geographical coverage (national or regional).

We considered the study population to be general population when subjects were randomly selected from the electoral rolls or recruited from the registries of the primary health care centers. The latter were considered general population because in Portugal the access to the National Health Service is universal and in theory everyone is registered, including those who do not use it as the main source of health care. The studies that evaluated samples of the general population were further divided according to the geographical coverage of the study, into regional or national representative samples. University students, occupational groups, users of primary health care centers (when subjects were recruited among the attendants to health care centers or data were abstracted from clinical records) and volunteers (when subjects took some initiative to participate in the survey) were considered different types of population.

We extracted age-specific prevalence estimates of current smoking, whenever available. Due to the large heterogeneity in the criteria to define classes of smoking, we considered that the data referred to current smoking when described in the original reports as: “currently smoking”; “currently smoking or had ceased for less than one year”; “smoking cigarettes but not as many as one per day, or smoking more than one cigarette per day, or smoking pipe or cigars”; “regular smoking”; “smoking daily”; “smoking daily for at least six months”.

The mean age of each age-group was extracted, whenever available. For the studies that did not present the mean age of the participants in each age-group we assumed the mid-point of the age interval; for the open age intervals at the extremes we estimated the mid-point by adding and subtracting the width of the closest class to the upper and to the lower limits, respectively (e.g. for surveys reporting data in participants aged < 30, 30–39, 40–49, and ≥ 50 years, we considered the overall range as 20–59 years). When an age-group also included subjects aged below 18 years old (e.g. 17–20 years), we computed the mid-point and excluded the data if the mid-point year was lower than 17.5 years old.

We obtained age- and sex-specific estimates directly from the authors of three studies [7, 19, 20], including one of the largest regional surveys and two national surveys.

Differences in the data extracted by the two investigators were discussed until consensus, and involving a third investigator whenever necessary.

Data analysis
We compared the estimates of current smoking across the different types of population, considering national representative samples of the general population as the reference class. To quantify these differences, we fitted sex-specific multiple linear regression models, adjusting for the mean age of the participants (continuous variable), the year of survey (continuous variable), the smoking measure involved (daily smoking/current smoking, categorical variable) and geographical coverage of the study (national/regional, categorical variable). Since more than one estimate of the smoking prevalence could be extracted from each report, corresponding to different age strata, the confidence intervals derived from the multiple linear regression models were calculated using robust estimates of the standard errors [21], to account for the dependence between the observations from the same study.

To estimate the time trends of the prevalence of smoking, we considered only the results of the studies that evaluated samples with national coverage that were representative of the general population [14, 20, 22, 23, 24]. We conducted sex-specific stratified analyses for four age-groups and according to birth cohorts. We selected the age-groups ≤ 30, 31–50, 51–70 and > 70 to represent young, young middle aged, middle aged and older subjects.

As some of the studies included in the review evaluated samples of subjects in a wide range of ages, and therefore the estimated mid-point of the age-group may not correspond to an accurate estimation of the age of a large proportion of the subjects evaluated, we excluded the results of these studies from the time trends analyses [14, 24].

To compute the year of birth of the participants, we subtracted the mid-point age of each age-group from the calendar year of the survey. This variable was further categorized using the quartiles of the distribution as cutoffs: ≤ 1926; 1927–1946; 1947–1959; ≥ 1960.

The results are presented in figures, describing the sex-specific variation of the smoking prevalence over time for each age group and birth cohort. We included in the figures only one estimate per age-group from each study. When studies reported estimates by strata of age that were narrower than the age-agroups we defined for analysis, it corresponded to the average of the prevalence in the narrower age strata, weighted by the corresponding number of participants. Each figure also includes a line representing the linear or quadratic (whenever significantly different from the linear) prediction of the prevalence of current smoking as a function of the year of survey.

We also provide estimates of the prevalence of smoking obtained from the linear regression models in selected calendar years, for each age-group and birth cohort.

Results

Systematic review
Thirty studies were eligible for the systematic review. Detailed information on their main characteristics, as well as the respective prevalence estimates, are provided in the Additional file 1: Table S1. The reports were published between 1990 and 2012, and referred to data collected between 1987 and 2012.

Estimates of current smoking in women and in men were available from 26 and 28 reports, respectively, 8 of which evaluated mainland/national samples. The studies were conducted in 5 different types of population, including general population (n = 14), occupational groups (n = 3), university students (n = 6), users of primary health care centers (n = 6) and volunteers (n = 1) (Additional file 1: Table S1).

Estimates of the prevalence of current smoking according to the type of population
Having as reference the results from the 6 studies that evaluated national samples of the general population and provided age-stratified estimates, the prevalence of current smoking among women, adjusted for the age of the participants, year of survey and measure of smoking involved, was significantly higher in primary health care users [4.6%; 95% confidence interval (95% CI): 2.1 to 7.0]. Among men, the prevalence of current smoking was significantly higher in regional samples of the general population (7.0%; 95% CI: 0.1 to 13.4) and primary health care centres users (5.3%; 95% CI: 2.7 to 7.9); it was significantly lower in samples of specific occupational groups (−12.5%; 95% CI: -16.2 to −8.8), volunteers (−7.5%; 95% CI: -8.9 to −6.1) and university students (−13.4%; 95% CI: -24.5 to −2.4) independently of the age of the participants, survey year and measure involved to define smoking (Figure 1).
https://static-content.springer.com/image/art%3A10.1186%2F1471-2458-12-958/MediaObjects/12889_2012_Article_4803_Fig1_HTML.jpg
Figure 1
Differences in the estimates of the prevalence of current smoking according to the type of population sampled, in comparison with samples of the general population with national representativeness, in women and men. The prevalences were estimated using sex-specific models including the prevalence of smoking as dependent variable and the type of population, the mean age of participants (continuous variable), the year of survey (continuous variable), the geographical coverage of the study (national/regional, categorical variable) and the smoking measurement (current smoking/daily smoking, categorical variable) of the study as independent variables.
Trends in smoking prevalence in the general population
Between 1988 and 2008, the prevalence of current smoking increased significantly among women of all ages, except in those older than 70 years (Figure 2). The steepest increase was observed in those aged 31–50 years and 51–70 years (from 4.6% and 0.1% in 1988, respectively, to 16.4% and 4.5% in 2008, respectively); a less pronounced upward trend was reported in younger women (Figure 2 and Table 1). The prevalence of smoking increased in all cohorts, except in women born before 1926, though the absolute variation was much smaller than the observed in the analysis by age-group (Figure 3 and Table 1).
https://static-content.springer.com/image/art%3A10.1186%2F1471-2458-12-958/MediaObjects/12889_2012_Article_4803_Fig2_HTML.jpg
Figure 2
Trends in the prevalence of smoking in different age group, by sex. Only were considered the results of the studies involving national representative samples of the general population. When a given study provided more than one estimate for each of the age groups computed, we computed the weighted mean of the prevalence of smoking. Studies involving samples with a wide age-range and not presenting age-stratified data were excluded.
Table 1
Estimated prevalence of smoking by age group and birth cohort
 	
Estimated prevalence of smoking (%) and 95% confidence intervals *
 	
Women
Men
 	
1988†
1998†
2008†
1988†
1998†
2008†
Age group
   ≤ 30 years
12.4 (8. 3 to 16.5)
14.4 (12.0 to 16.9)
15.9 (12.4 to 19.3)
41.8 (30.6 to 52.9)
35.3 (28.7 to 41.9)
28.8 (18.0 to 39.7)
   31 – 50 years
4.6 (3.0 to 6.3)
10.5 (9.4 to 11.6)
16.4 (15.7 to 17.2)
39.3 (32.2 to 46.4)
36.9 (32.9 to 40.8)
34.4 (27.4 to 41.5)
   51 – 70 years
0.1 (0.0 to 2.4)
2.3 (1.0 to 3.5)
4.5 (2.2 to 6.7)
24.8 (18.7 to 30.9)
20.9 (15.9 to 25.9)
16.9 (12.2 to 21.6)
   ≥ 71 years
0.1 (0.0 to 0.7)
0.5 (0.2 to 1.0)
0.9 (0.0 to 2.1)
15.1 (10.9 to 19.3)
9.9 (7.2 to 12.6)
4.6 (2.4 to 6.8)
Birth cohort
   ≤ 1926
0.3 (0.0 to 1.0)
0.5 (0.1 to 1.0)
0.0 (0.0 to 1.2)
15.5 (8.5 to 22.5)
7.3 (1.5 to 13.1)
6.8 (0.0 to 19.3)
   1927 – 1946
0.6 (0.0 to 2.8)
1.5 (0.3 to 2.6)
2.3 (0.3 to 4.3)
26.1 (14.3 to 37.8)
18.3 (12.3 to 24.3)
10.5 (0.0 to 21.2)
   1947 – 1959
6.3 (0.0 to 17.3)
7.1 (0.2 to 14.0)
7.9 (0.0 to 19.9)
37.3 (3.1 to 71.4)
37.0 (8.3 to 65.8)
17.5 (0.0 to 57.0)
   ≥ 1960
12.0 (9.3 to 14.7)
13.9 (12.5 to 15.3)
15.9 (13.8 to 18.1)
42.5 (34.6 to 50.4)
37.1 (33.0 to 41.1)
31.6 (25.4 to 37.9)
* Prevalence estimated from sex-specific linear regression model, for each age group and birth cohort;

† The years 1988 and 2008 were selected because correspond approximately to the first year and last years with available data, respectively, and 1998 because is the mid-point of this period.

https://static-content.springer.com/image/art%3A10.1186%2F1471-2458-12-958/MediaObjects/12889_2012_Article_4803_Fig3_HTML.jpg
Figure 3
Trends in the prevalence of smoking in different birth cohorts, by sex.
In the same 20 year-period, the prevalence of smoking among men decreased in all age-groups, with steepest declines observed among those aged ≤ 30 years (from 41.8% in 1988 to 28.8% in 2008) and those aged ≥ 71 years (from 15.1% in 1988 to 4.6% in 2008) (Figure 2 and Table 1). The prevalence of smoking has declined linearly among men born between 1927 and 1946, and in those born after 1960. For the cohorts of men born before 1926, the prevalence decreased, mainly before 1995, and stabilized thereafter, while among those born between 1947 and 1959 a steep decline was observed only in the second half of the period of analysis (Figure 3).

Discussion

This study shows that in the last decades the smoking prevalence increased markedly among Portuguese women, while it decreased among men. The results from the studies involving samples of the general population without national representativeness overestimate the national prevalence of smoking, showing that these studies are of limited interest when the purpose is to estimate time trends in the general population.

Smoking is strongly associated with morbidity, and the lower prevalence observed in the samples of specific occupational groups may result from selection bias, as subjects need to be healthy enough to be active workers and those who develop diseases are more likely to leave their employment [25]. Among workers, smoking has also been associated with greater absenteeism and injuries [26, 27], which contributes to a lower probability of smokers being selected for the epidemiological investigations.

In the only study whose participants we considered volunteers, the healthy volunteer effect is likely to have occurred, as those who have a proactive attitude to participate in a survey tend to be more sensitive to health messages than the average person from the general population [28, 29].

Primary health care users had significantly higher levels of smoking, both in women and in men. Smoking is strongly associated with a higher incidence of several chronic diseases [30, 31] and the prevalence estimates for this group may reflect the increased use of health care services by smokers.

The gender differences in the prevalence of smoking among university students are likely to be explained by Portuguese women being at earlier stages of the smoking epidemic than men.

According to the most recent update of the smoking epidemic model [16], among women the stage II is characterized by a rapid increase of the prevalence of smoking, along with few deaths attributable to smoking; stage III starts when the peak prevalence is achieved. Our results on the trends in the prevalence of smoking place Portuguese women in the second stage of the epidemic [15, 16]. However, between 1955 and 2005, the lung cancer mortality rates increased 1.6% (95% CI: 1.4% – 1.8%) per year among Portuguese women (35–74 years) [32], which is compatible with both the end of stage II and stage III of the smoking epidemic.

The data referring to men suggest an ongoing transition from the third to the fourth phase of the smoking epidemic. In phase III, the prevalence of smoking begins to decline, while the smoking-attributable mortality rises rapidly [15, 16]. In phase IV, the prevalence continues to decline while the mortality attributable to smoking peaks in the beginning of this stage and declines thereafter [15, 16]. Among Portuguese men aged 35 to 74 years, between 1986 and 1996, the annual percent change (APC) in the lung cancer mortality rate was 1.52% (95% CI: 0.59% to 2.46%), and between 1996 and 2005 the rates stabilized (APC: -0.15%, 95% CI: -0.99% to 0.69%) [32].

Previous studies involving cross-sectional analyses have placed Portugal at earlier stages of the epidemic than most European countries [23, 33]; Spain, the neighbour country, is at the beginning of stage IV [34]. We put forward a sex-specific classification for the Portuguese population, in accordance with the recent review of the smoking epidemic model [16]. The earlier stage proposed for women might be a consequence of Portugal’s lower economic and social development, which may have determined a slower spread of the epidemic among the less educated women who are particularly affected by prices increases [35, 36]. Portugal may take advantage of this position among women, by implementing effective public health measures to curb the trends observed and to avoid the harmful effects of smoking in the next decades.

The present review is based on an extensive literature search and provides a comprehensive summary of the best available evidence on the prevalence of smoking in Portugal. However, there are some limitations that need to be addressed.

The studies included in the systematic review are heterogeneous in what concerns the criteria to define smoking, involving measures of current and daily smoking, possibly contributing to an underestimation of the smoking prevalence and trends in Portugal. However, there were no statistically significant differences according to the criteria involved and a sensitivity analysis that excluded the studies only providing data on daily smoking yielded virtually the same results.

Another limitation of this study results from the inclusion of samples of subjects aged above 18 years, while the smoking behaviours of the population aged above 15 years are important for a more comprehensive understanding of the dynamics of smoking and the tobacco epidemic.

Portugal signed the World Health Organization Framework Convention on Tobacco Control and already adopted measures to control tobacco consumption. These include health warnings in the cigarette packages, tax increases and, more recently, a law regulating the use of tobacco in restaurants and other public places, aiming to protect subjects from passive smoking exposure [37]. The strict enforcement of the latter measure occurred in 2008 and may have had a greater impact on the smoking behaviours of the population. However, we only obtained age-stratified data on the smoking prevalence until 2008 and therefore the impact of this measure could not be ascertained in the present study.

After 1998, the smoking prevalence has been declining among all birth cohorts of men. This is in accordance with the decreasing sales of tobacco products in Portugal, which were estimated to be nearly 18 billion cigarettes in 2002, and less than 12 billion in 2011 [38]. Notwithstanding, the trends reported in this study, especially among women, demand for the reinforcement of the existing policies and for more effective policies targeting the whole population. In Portugal the percentage of per capita gross domestic product needed to purchase 100 packs of cigarettes was 1.66 in 1990 and 1.76 in 2006, representing a small change in the cigarettes affordability in the country over the last decades [39]. Price increases have been associated with reduced consumption and quitting smoking [40], and tax increases may be particularly important in the current local scenario of economic and financial crisis. Furthermore, they have the potential to affect particularly lower socio-economic groups, among whom the prevalence of smoking is higher in men [23] and expected to increase among women [19]. Other measures, such as the promotion of the smoking cessation clinics already existing in the country and the creation of new ones, as well as the free provision of nicotine-replacement therapies and other similar aids, may contribute to downward trends [41]. The monitoring of the epidemic should also consider the study of other tobacco products expected to be increasingly used with the rising prices and decreasing purchasing power [40].

Conclusions

Our results place Portuguese women in the stage II of the smoking epidemic, while men are at the later stages, between stages III and IV.

Logo: Tobacco In Australia: Facts and Issues

Button: GO (Submit form)
            Next Chapter
Home » Chapter 3: Health Effects » 3.0 Introduction

3.0 Introduction
 Show / hide chapter menu
Last updated: March 2015 
Suggested citation: Winstanley, MH & Greenhalgh, EM. 3.0 Introduction. In Scollo, MM and Winstanley, MH [editors]. Tobacco in Australia: Facts and issues. Melbourne: Cancer Council Victoria; 2015. Available from http://www.tobaccoinaustralia.org.au/chapter-3-health-effects/3-0-background 
Smoking of tobacco as we know it today, in the form of manufactured or 'factory-made' cigarettes, became common in Australia in the late 1800s. Pipe and cigar smoking was already widespread among men, but the convenience and ready availability of the cigarette soon made it a popular alternative.1 Manufactured cigarettes were supplied to Australians and their allies in the trenches of World War I,1 and by the end of World War II, nearly three quarters of Australian men and one quarter of women were smokers, the majority using cigarettes (see also Chapter 1, Section 1.1).
Similar changes in smoking behaviour had occurred in Western Europe and North America, and with them, a marked escalation in lung cancer death rates and the growing suspicion that cigarette use was implicated in this trend. By 1950 several studies had been published in the medical literature2 and the finding that cigarette smoking and lung cancer appeared to be causally linked was reported.3,4
Several series of authoritative, landmark reports have since been published by national and international agencies,i documenting the damaging effects of smoking and calling for action to help halt the smoking epidemic. Of these, the most regular series has been that issued by the Office of the US Surgeon General. Since 1964, comprehensive and rigorous reports on various aspects of tobacco and health have been issued by the US Surgeon General, repeating the conclusion that smoking is "the single greatest cause of avoidable morbidity and mortality in the United States," and never finding reason to reverse any earlier conclusions of causality.5
The 2004 report of the US Surgeon General, The Health Consequences of Smoking, published the following four major conclusions:6
Smoking harms nearly every organ of the body, causing many diseases and reducing the health of smokers in general.
Quitting smoking has immediate as well as long-term benefits, reducing risks for diseases caused by smoking and improving health in general.
Smoking cigarettes with lower machine-measured yields of tar and nicotine provides no clear benefit to health.
The list of diseases caused by smoking has been expanded to include abdominal aortic aneurysm, acute myeloid leukaemia, cataract, cervical cancer, kidney cancer, pancreatic cancer, pneumonia, periodontitis and stomach cancer.
In addition, the 2014 report of the US Surgeon General, The Health Consequences of Smoking – 50 Years of Progress, published these major conclusions in regard to the health effects of smoking:7
The century-long epidemic of cigarette smoking has caused an enormous avoidable public health tragedy. Since the first Surgeon General’s report in 1964 more than 20 million premature deaths [in the U.S] can be attributed to cigarette smoking.
The tobacco epidemic was initiated and has been sustained by the aggressive strategies of the tobacco industry, which has deliberately misled the public on the risks of smoking cigarettes.
Even 50 years after the first Surgeon General’s report, research continues to newly identify diseases caused by smoking, including such common diseases as diabetes mellitus, rheumatoid arthritis, and colorectal cancer.
In addition to causing multiple diseases, cigarette smoking has many other adverse effects on the body, such as causing inflammation and impairing immune function.
The burden of death and disease from tobacco use in the United States is overwhelmingly caused by cigarettes and other combusted tobacco products; rapid elimination of their use will dramatically reduce this burden.
3.0.1 Defining causality
The US Surgeon General's reports have provided a detailed review of definitions of causality of disease, and how measures of causality may be applied. Causality is determined by evaluating the range of available evidence and considering it against well-established criteria. The more that an observed association fulfils the criteria, the more likely it is that a causal relationship can be inferred. These criteria are outlined in the US Surgeon General's Report for 2004:8
Consistency: This refers to the persistence of the finding of an association between exposure and outcome in a number of methodologically valid studies undertaken in a range of settings. This helps ensure that possible confounding effects are eliminated, and also increases the statistical validity of the finding through the accumulation of additional evidence.
Strength of association: Strength refers both to magnitude of the association, and to its statistical strength. The greater the measured association and the more sound its statistical basis, the less likely it is that the findings are influenced by chance, bias, or unmeasured or poorly controlled confounding factors. However the observed association must also have a plausible basis in understood biological processes.
Specificity: Specificity refers to the degree to which exposure to the suspected disease causing agent can predict outcome. Other biological and epidemiological factors may need to be taken into account. For example, not all smokers develop lung cancer, and not all cases of lung cancer are caused by smoking. However, the extremely high relative risk for lung cancer in smokers, and the high percentage of lung cancers attributable to smoking, gives the association between smoking and lung cancer "a high degree of specificity".
Temporality: Exposure to the causative factor must precede the onset of the disease. Considered alone, temporality is a poor predictor of causality, but no association can be considered to fulfil the criteria for causality if temporality is not satisfied.
Coherence, Plausibility and Analogy: Taken together, these three criteria require that the proposed causal relationship must not defy known scientific principles, and that it must be biologically plausible and consistent with experimentally demonstrated biological mechanisms and other relevant patterns.
Biologic Gradient (Dose-Response): This criterion refers to the observation of increased effect (for example incidence of disease) in response to increased dose (heavier and/or longer duration of smoking). Meeting this criterion forms a strong support for causality, except in the unlikely event that there is an unidentified confounder, which happens to be varying in the same manner as the observed dose and which could account for the measured association. Virtually all health outcomes causally linked to smoking have demonstrated a dose-response relationship of some description.
Experiment: This criterion refers to naturally occurring "experiments" that might be considered to imitate the conditions of a properly conducted experiment in a scientific environment, and whose outcomes might have the force of a true experiment. An example of a 'natural experiment' in the smoking arena is assessing the health consequences of quitting smoking. To attribute observed improvements in health outcomes to factors other than smoking cessation would necessitate identifying alternative influences and demonstrating that those who continued smoking had also attained a health benefit where that alternative influence was present.
The more closely an association fulfils the above criteria, the stronger its claim to causality. Not all inferences of causality will necessarily satisfy all criteria. For example where biological mechanisms may not be completely understood, causality may still be justified by satisfaction of other criteria, such as consistency and strength of association. Those applying the criteria must weigh the all of the scientific evidence and make a multidisciplinary judgement.8
3.0.2 Tobacco—a leading preventable cause of death and disease
Smoking is one of the leading preventable causes of death and disease in Australia, responsible for about 15 000 deaths annually.ii 9,10 In 2003, tobacco caused more than 1 in every 10 deaths in Australia, and taking into consideration sickness and disability as well as deaths, tobacco caused more disease and injury in Australia than any other single risk factor (Table 3.1).9 Tobacco is also responsible for most (90%) of all drug-caused deaths.iii In 2004-05, smoking caused 14 times as many deaths as alcohol, and 17 times the number of deaths due to illicit drug use.10 (see Table 3.0.1).
Table 3.0.1	
Deaths attributable to leading selected risk factors in Australia, 2003
Risk factor
Number of deaths
Percentage of total deaths from all causes
Percentage of total burden of disease and injury
High blood pressure
22 504
17.0
7.6
Tobacco
15 511
11.7
7.8
High blood cholesterol
15 351
11.6
6.2
Physical inactivity
13 491
10.2
6.6
High body mass
9525
7.2
7.5
Alcohol*
1084
0.8
2.3
*Net effects, i.e. offsetting beneficial effects against harmful effects.
Source: compiled from Begg et al.9
It has been conservatively estimated that smoking kills about one half of all persistent users.2 A more recent study puts this figure at closer to two in three.11 Over the decades, the death toll from tobacco use has been vast. In the 50 years from 1960  to 2010, smoking is estimated to have killed 821,000 Australians.12 Tobacco use is also responsible for a global pandemic of death and disease, causing nearly six million deaths a year. More than five million of those deaths are caused by direct tobacco use, while more than 600 000 are caused by exposure to second-hand smoke13 (see Section 3.36).

i For example the reports of the US Surgeon General, most of which are available at http://profiles.nlm.nih.gov/NN/Views/AlphaChron/date/10006/ , the Royal College of Physicians of London, some of which may be viewed at http://www.rcplondon.ac.uk/news/smoking.asp, and the Monographs of the International Agency for Research into Cancer at http://monographs.iarc.fr/ENG/Monographs/index.php .
ii The most widely used estimate of deaths in Australia is currently that produced for by Begg et al in The burden of disease and injury in Australia, 20036. The estimate used for detailed calculations in the report by Collins and Lapsley 2004/057 is based on figures for a later year but comes up with a similar result (14 901).
iii Figures based on estimated number of deaths taking into account deaths prevented (Collins & Lapsley 2004/05 p.52 & p. 56). 

HomeWhy quit?Effects of smoking on the body
How smoking affects your body
Every cigarette you smoke is harmful
Smoking is the biggest cause of preventable deaths in England, accounting for more than 80,000 deaths each year. One in two smokers will die from a smoking-related disease.
If you could see the damage, you'd stop.


Circulation
When you smoke, the toxins from cigarette smoke enter your blood. The toxins in your blood then:
Make your blood thicker, and increase chances of clot formation
Increase your blood pressure and heart rate, making your heart work harder than normal
Narrow your arteries, reducing the amount of oxygen rich blood circulating to your organs.
Together, these changes to your body when you smoke increase the chance of your arteries narrowing and clots forming, which can cause a heart attack or stroke.
Heart
Smoking damages your heart and your blood circulation, increasing the risk of conditions such as coronary heart disease, heart attack, stroke, peripheral vascular disease (damaged blood vessels) and cerebrovascular disease (damaged arteries that supply blood to your brain).
Carbon monoxide from the smoke and nicotine both put a strain on the heart by making it work faster. They also increase your risk of blood clots. Other chemicals in cigarette smoke damage the lining of your coronary arteries, leading to furring of the arteries.
In fact, smoking doubles your risk of having a heart attack, and if you smoke you have twice the risk of dying from coronary heart disease than lifetime non-smokers.
The good news is that after only one year of not smoking, your risk is reduced by half. After stopping for 15 years, your risk is similar to that of someone who has never smoked.
Stomach
Smokers have an increased chance of getting stomach cancer or ulcers. Smoking can weaken the muscle that controls the lower end of your gullet (oesophagus) and allow acid from the stomach to travel in the wrong direction back up your gullet, a process known as reflux.
Smoking is a significant risk factor for developing kidney cancer, and the more you smoke the greater the risk. For example, research has shown that if you regularly smoke 10 cigarettes a day, you are one and a half times more likely to develop kidney cancer compared with a non-smoker. This is increased to twice as likely if you smoke 20 or more cigarettes a day.
Skin
Smoking reduces the amount of oxygen that gets to your skin. This means that if you smoke, your skin ages more quickly and looks grey and dull. The toxins in your body also cause cellulite.
Smoking prematurely ages your skin by between 10 and 20 years, and makes it three times more likely you'll get facial wrinkling, particularly around the eyes and mouth. Smoking even gives you a sallow, yellow-grey complexion and hollow cheeks, which can cause you to look gaunt.
The good news is that once you stop smoking, you will prevent further deterioration to your skin caused by smoking.
Bones
Smoking can cause your bones to become weak and brittle. Women need to be especially careful as they are more likely to suffer from brittle bones (osteoporosis) than non-smokers.
Brain
If you smoke, you are more likely to have a stroke than someone who doesn't smoke.
In fact, smoking increases your risk of having a stroke by at least 50%, which can cause brain damage and death. And, by smoking, you double your risk of dying from a stroke.
One way that smoking can increase your risk of a stroke is by increasing your chances of developing a brain aneurysm. This is a bulge in a blood vessel caused by a weakness in the blood vessel wall. This can rupture or burst which will lead to an extremely serious condition known as a subarachnoid haemorrhage, which is a type of stroke, and can cause extensive brain damage and death.
The good news is that within two years of stopping smoking, your risk of stroke is reduced to half that of a non-smoker and within five years it will be the same as a non-smoker.
Lungs
Your lungs can be very badly affected by smoking. Coughs, colds, wheezing and asthma are just the start. Smoking can cause fatal diseases such as pneumonia, emphysema and lung cancer. Smoking causes 84% of deaths from lung cancer and 83% of deaths from chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
COPD, a progressive and debilitating disease, is the name for a collection of lung diseases including chronic bronchitis and emphysema. People with COPD have difficulties breathing, primarily due to the narrowing of their airways and destruction of lung tissue. Typical symptoms of COPD include: increasing breathlessness when active, a persistent cough with phlegm and frequent chest infections.
Whilst the early signs of COPD can often be dismissed as a ‘smoker’s cough’, if people continue smoking and the condition worsens, it can greatly impact on their quality of life. You can slow down the progression of the disease and stopping smoking is the most effective way to do this.
Mouth and throat
Smoking causes unattractive problems such as bad breath and stained teeth, and can also cause gum disease and damage your sense of taste.
The most serious damage smoking causes in your mouth and throat is an increased risk of cancer in your lips, tongue, throat, voice box and gullet (oesophagus). More than 93% of oropharangeal cancers (cancer in part of the throat) are caused by smoking.
The good news is that when you stop using tobacco, even after many years of use, you can greatly reduce your risk of developing head and neck cancer. Once you've been smokefree for 20 years, your risk of head and neck cancer is reduced to that of a non-smoker.
Reproduction and fertility
Smoking can cause male impotence, as it damages the blood vessels that supply blood to the penis. It can also damage sperm, reduce sperm count and cause testicular cancer. Up to 120,000 men from the UK in their 20s and 30s are impotent as a direct result of smoking, and men who smoke have a lower sperm count than those who are non-smokers.
For women, smoking can reduce fertility. One study found that smokers were over three times more likely than non-smokers to have taken more than one year to conceive. The study estimated that the fertility of smoking women was 72% that of non-smokers.
Smoking also increases your risk of cervical cancer. People who smoke are less able to get rid of the HPV infection from the body, which can develop into cancer.
Smoking while you are pregnant can lead to miscarriage, premature birth, stillbirth and illness, and it increases the risk of cot death by at least 25%.
If you are pregnant, you can find lots more information on the specialist free support available from the NHS to help you stop smoking here.
The good news is that once you stop smoking, your health improves and your body will begin to recover.
Find out more here
image: https://campaignstorage.blob.core.windows.net/smokefree/production/content_module/image/861/ed38ff8d5156cae093d5a69b1637ea4d.jpg
Ed38ff8d5156cae093d5a69b1637ea4d
Think you're not addicted?
Take our quick test to find out.
Take the addiction test
Quit now
There’s never been a better time to stop smoking. Sign up today for FREE, proven support.
Back to top

HOME EFFECTS OF SHISHA  QUIT SHISHA QUITTING TOOLS BLOG

Search
slide
Protect your health and stay clear of Hookah!
123
The Quit Shisha Guide – eBook
40 Days to Quitting Shisha / Hookah
Our informative eBook is here to help you quit shisha, by highlighting all the health issues, along with guiding you on a 40 day plan.


Quitting Tools
The Smoke free Web site includes a variety of interactive tools to help you quit smoking.
Get more free resources 
For cutting-edge, evidence-based tools designed...


Home > The Effects of Smoking Shisha
The Effects of Smoking Shisha
Shisha is the flavoured tobacco used in smoking process using hookah water pipes, which are also called by other names such as Narghile, Hubble Bubble, Goza, among other names. The process of smoking Shisha started when tobacco is soaked on fruits shavings such as apple, grapes and strawberries.

A hookah consists of a base, pipe, bowl and hose or a mouthpiece. Tobacco is placed in the bowl, which is at the top of the pipe structure. An aluminium foil covers the bowl and small charcoal pieces are then placed on the foil, which is punctured using a pin to gently heat the tobacco. When smoked using the hose; smooth, sweet-smelling vapour is filtered through the base containing water. It also comes in floral flavours such as coconut, vanilla and rose.

Main Effects of Shisha
ACauses cancer
Due to the mode of Shisha smoking—including frequency of puffing, depth of inhalation, and length of the smoking session—Shisha smokers may absorb higher concentrations of the toxins found in cigarette smoke, thus increasing the hazard to the body.

The charcoal used to heat tobacco in the Shisha pipes increases the health risks. Even after it has passed through water, the smoke produced by a Shisha contains high levels of toxic compounds, including carbon monoxide, heavy metals, and cancer-causing chemicals. Shisha tobacco and smoke contain numerous toxic substances known to cause lung, bladder, and oral cancers. A typical one-hour session of hookah smoking exposes the user to 100 to 200 times the volume of smoke inhaled from a single cigarette.

Irritation from exposure to tobacco juices increases the risk of developing oral cancers. The irritation by tobacco juice products is likely to be greater among Shisha smokersthan among pipe or cigar smokers because Shisha smoking is typically practiced (with or without inhalation) more often and for longer periods of time.

BCauses heart problem
Shisha tobacco and smoke contain numerous toxic substances known to cause clogged arteries and heart disease.

CPeriodontal (gum tissue) disease
There is an increased level of nicotine and cotinine (a by product of nicotine) in the blood plasma, saliva and urine of Shisha smokers that affects the periodontal tissues.

DProne to infections
Hookah pipes used in hookah bars and cafes may not be cleaned properly, risking the spread of infectious diseases. Infectious diseases including tuberculosis (which can infect the lungs or other parts of the body), aspergillus (a fungus that can cause serious lung infections), and helicobacter (which can cause stomach ulcers) may be spread by sharing the pipe or through the way the tobacco is prepared.

Hookah pipes used in hookah bars and cafes may not be cleaned properly, risking the spread of infectious diseases.

ELow birth weight babies with pregnant women smoking Shisha
Shisha smoking among pregnant mothers is risky to the baby as well, since the child may face underweight problems and difficulty in breathing. Babies born to women who smoked one or more water pipes a day during pregnancy have lower birth weights (were at least 3½ ounces less) than babies born to non-smokers and are at an increased risk for respiratory diseases.

FDanger of second hand smoke
Using Shisha smoke poses a serious potential health hazard to smokers and others exposed to the smoke emitted. The second hand smoke from Shisha poses a serious risk for non-smokers, particularly because it contains smoke not only from the tobacco but also from the heat source (e.g., charcoal) used in the hookah.

GNicotine addiction
Hookah and Shisha smoking deliver almost the same amount of nicotine as cigarettes do, leading to nicotine addiction.

HSome effects of Shisha also includes: wrinkled skin, sexual impotence, etc.
Shisha smokers who regard shisha as another form of smoking with a lower risk should reconsider their thoughts. The use of smoking Shisha as a past time hobby, a bonding session or a social event for some is entirely our choice. That temporary bliss given by smoking Shisha for a long run is not to be ignored though. The listed effects of smoking Shisha above are just some of the effects and we do not know what more could it cause. The sure thing is, the moment you are having a Shisha session you are also buying yourself a ticket in slowly killing your body bits by bits.

The prevalence of people smoking Shisha as a way of life is a call for attention. It is maybe because you want to get out from the stress of a problem that needs a solution. By way of this information people can make decisions to save or if they choose to ruin their body. If smoking cigarettes is harmful, then hookah smoking is only worse.

 3420 140 43 69Share30

Newsletter


Your name
 
Your E-mail
 Sign Up
Featured Post

How to Quit Smoking Shisha Completely by Preparing for a Relapse
Shisha Facts: How Shisha Affects Men Fertility and Women Pregnancy
Top Posts

E-Shisha vs Traditional Shisha
The e-hookah 101: A guide to electronic hookah
Support Quit Shisha Cause
Why Smoking Shisha is worse than Smoking Cigarettes
Government Clampdown Needed on Sale of Shisha Tobacco
Categories

Cancer
Hepatitis by Shisha
Herpes by Shisha
Quit Shisha
Quit Shisha Blog
Social Effects of Shisha
Tuberculosis by Shisha
Uncategorized
Effects of Shisha
Cancer
Hepatitis
Herpres
Tuberculosis
Shisha Addiction
Social Effects of Shisha
Popular Pages
Building Awareness about Effects of Hookah
The Effects of Smoking Shisha
Myth and Facts about Shisha
Shisha Addiction

Home Health Conditions  HealthDay Video  Wellness Library HealthDay en Español Physician's Briefing License Our News
Mental Illness May Make Teens Vulnerable to Drugs, Alcohol
Brazilian study found half of those who smoked, drank, did pot had symptoms of psychological disorders

woman smoking
FRIDAY, Aug. 5, 2016 (HealthDay News) -- Teens who are struggling with mental health disorders are more likely to smoke cigarettes, drink alcohol and use marijuana, a new Brazilian study suggests.

Researchers reviewed self-reported data from more than 4,000 high school students in Sao Paulo. The teens were between the ages of 15 and 18. They came from 128 public and private schools.

Just under half had clinically significant symptoms of mental health conditions. Another 8 percent had some symptoms, and 44 percent had no symptoms, the study revealed.

During the previous month, 38 percent of teens had used alcohol, 9 percent said they'd used tobacco and 7 percent had used marijuana. When asked about frequent use, 2 percent of teens said they frequently used alcohol, tobacco or marijuana, the study found.

Teens with clinically significant symptoms of mental health problems were more likely to use alcohol, tobacco and marijuana than those without symptoms, the researchers said.

"Studies to determine which specific mental health symptoms are associated with substance use among adolescents in different settings are crucial," said senior study author Dr. Silvia Martins. She is an associate professor of epidemiology at the Columbia University Mailman School of Public Health in New York City.

"In developing countries such as Brazil where a wide gap of social inequalities is observed, this is particularly important. Mental health policies should focus on these populations, especially since providing early treatment for psychiatric symptoms may have a direct impact on mental health prevalence and its costs among adults," Martins added in a Columbia news release.

The study was published online recently in The American Journal on Addictions.

More information

The U.S. National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism outlines how parents can prevent children and teens from drinking.

SOURCE: Columbia University, news release, Aug. 2, 2016

-- Robert Preidt

Last Updated: Aug 5, 2016

Copyright © 2016 HealthDay. All rights reserved.

HealthDay TV
Play
Dating Apps and Self-Esteem                
Dating Apps and Self-Esteem
RELATED STORIES
Brief Return of Concussion Symptoms Normal Part of Recovery: Study
Study Dashes Millennials' Reputation as Hookup Generation
Vision Trouble Can Dim Life's Prospects
Can Trauma Trigger Violent Crime in Mentally Ill?
Middle Schoolers Exposed to Alcohol Ads Every Day: Study
Does TV Influence Which Alcohol Teens Favor?
RELATED ARTICLES
Brief Return of Concussion Symptoms Normal Part of Recovery: Study
Brief Return of Concussion Symptoms Normal Part of Recovery: Study
Study Dashes Millennials' Reputation as Hookup Generation
Study Dashes Millennials' Reputation as Hookup Generation
Vision Trouble Can Dim Life's Prospects
Vision Trouble Can Dim Life's Prospects
Can Trauma Trigger Violent Crime in Mentally Ill? 
Can Trauma Trigger Violent Crime in Mentally Ill?
RELATED TOPICS
Marijuana News
Adolescents and Teen Health News
Misc. Tobacco Health News
Cigarette Smoking Tobacco Health News
Tobacco and Kids Health News
Psychology and Mental Health News
Parenting Health News
Mental Illness and Retardation News
Misc. Alcohol News
Alcohol Abuse News
Kids and Alcohol Health News
Addiction News
Home HealthDay TV Wellness Library HealthDay en Español Privacy Policy Physician's Briefing License Our News About HealthDay Ad Policy Contact Us

 Show / hide chapter menu
Last updated October 2014
Most people who smoke as adults first tried cigarettes in their teenage years.1 Smoking uptake and prevalence escalates rapidly during adolescence, with 2% of young Australians aged 12 years reporting smoking at least monthly in 2008, increasing to 18% among those aged 17 years in the same year.2 While fewer than 10% of 17-year-old currenti smokers in 2008 were 'certain' they would not be smoking in 12 months' time and 19% said they were 'unlikely' to be smoking, one-quarter of 17-year-olds were undecided, and 48% were 'likely' or 'certain' to be smoking in a year's time.2 This suggests that the majority of Australian students who smoked in their final year of school in 2008 will continue smoking beyond their school years.
An estimated 16 500 Australian school children progressed from experimental to established smoking behaviour2 in 2008,2 down from 22 077 in 2004–05.ii 3 Young people show signs of dependence on tobacco-delivered nicotine at very low consumption levels, and after smoking only a few cigarettes.4 British research has found that smoking just a single cigarette at the age of 11 can leave a child susceptible to later uptake of regular smoking, even after a period of three or more years. This could be due to neurobiological factors, or social or personal traits.5
By far the majority of Australian teenagers who become smokers obtain their first cigarette from a friend or an acquaintance.6
The first 18 sections of this chapter (5.1 through to 5.18) describe a range of factors that influence smoking experimentation and transition to more regular and established smoking. While the various threads are discussed separately, it is important to remember that in reality many of these factors are interconnected and should not be considered in isolation. The second part of this chapter, commencing with Section 5.19, examines the factors that occur or can be influenced to help prevent the uptake of smoking.
i In this study, current smokers are defined as having smoked at least one cigarette in the week prior to survey.2
ii Using the methodology outlined in White and Scollo3

Preventing Tobacco Use Among Youth and Young Adults
Fact Sheet

This is the 31st tobacco-related Surgeon General’s report issued since 1964. It describes the epidemic of tobacco use among youth ages 12 through 17 and young adults ages 18 through 25, including the epidemiology, causes, and health effects of this tobacco use and interventions proven to prevent it. Scientific evidence contained in this report supports the following facts:

We have made progress in reducing tobacco use among youth; however, far too many young people are still using tobacco. Today, more than 600,000 middle school students and 3 million high school students smoke cigarettes. Rates of decline for cigarette smoking have slowed in the last decade and rates of decline for smokeless tobacco use have stalled completely.

Every day, more than 1,200 people in this country die due to smoking. For each of those deaths, at least two youth or young adults become regular smokers each day. Almost 90% of those replacement smokers smoke their first cigarette by age 18.
There could be 3 million fewer young smokers today if success in reducing youth tobacco use that was made between 1997 and 2003 had been sustained.
Rates of smokeless tobacco use are no longer declining, and they appear to be increasing among some groups.
Cigars, especially cigarette-sized cigars, are popular with youth. One out of five high school males smokes cigars, and cigar use appears to be increasing among other groups.
Use of multiple tobacco products—including cigarettes, cigars, and smokeless tobacco—is common among young people.
Prevention efforts must focus on young adults ages 18 through 25, too. Almost no one starts smoking after age 25. Nearly 9 out of 10 smokers started smoking by age 18, and 99% started by age 26. Progression from occasional to daily smoking almost always occurs by age 26.
Tobacco use by youth and young adults causes both immediate and long-term damage. One of the most serious health effects is nicotine addiction, which prolongs tobacco use and can lead to severe health consequences. The younger youth are when they start using tobacco, the more likely they’ll be addicted.

Early cardiovascular damage is seen in most young smokers; those most sensitive die very young.
Smoking reduces lung function and retards lung growth. Teens who smoke are not only short of breath today, they may end up as adults with lungs that will never grow to full capacity. Such damage is permanent and increases the risk of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Youth are sensitive to nicotine and can feel dependent earlier than adults. Because of nicotine addiction, about three out of four teen smokers end up smoking into adulthood, even if they intend to quit after a few years.
Among youth who persist in smoking, a third will die prematurely from smoking.
Youth are vulnerable to social and environmental influences to use tobacco; messages and images that make tobacco use appealing to them are everywhere. 

Young people want to fit in with their peers. Images in tobacco marketing make tobacco use look appealing to this age group.
Youth and young adults see smoking in their social circles, movies they watch, video games they play, websites they visit, and many communities where they live. Smoking is often portrayed as a social norm, and young people exposed to these images are more likely to smoke.
Youth identify with peers they see as social leaders and may imitate their behavior; those whose friends or siblings smoke are more likely to smoke.
Youth who are exposed to images of smoking in movies are more likely to smoke. Those who get the most exposure to onscreen smoking are about twice as likely to begin smoking as those who get the least exposure. Images of smoking in movies have declined over the past decade; however, in 2010 nearly a third of top-grossing movies produced for children—those with ratings of G, PG, or PG-13— contained images of smoking.
Tobacco companies spend more than a million dollars an hour in this country alone to market their products. This report concludes that tobacco product advertising and promotions still entice far too many young people to start using tobacco.

The tobacco industry has stated that its marketing only promotes brand choices among adult smokers. Regardless of intent, this marketing encourages underage youth to smoke. Nearly 9 out of 10 smokers start smoking by age 18, and more than 80% of underage smokers choose brands from among the top three most heavily advertised.
The more young people are exposed to cigarette advertising and promotional activities, the more likely they are to smoke. 
The report finds that extensive use of price-reducing promotions has led to higher rates of tobacco use among young people than would have occurred in the absence of these promotions. 
Many tobacco products on the market appeal to youth. Some cigarette-sized cigars contain candy and fruit flavoring, such as strawberry and grape. 
Many of the newest smokeless tobacco products do not require users to spit, and others dissolve like mints; these products include snus—a spitless, dry snuff packaged in a small teabag-like sachet—and dissolvable strips and lozenges. Young people find these products appealing in part because they can be used without detection at school or other places where smoking is banned. However, these products cause and sustain nicotine addiction, and most youth who use them also smoke cigarettes.
Through the use of advertising and promotional activities, packaging, and product design, the tobacco industry encourages the myth that smoking makes you thin. This message is especially appealing to young girls. It is not true—teen smokers are not thinner than nonsmokers.
Comprehensive, sustained, multi-component programs can cut youth tobacco use in half in 6 years.

Prevention is critical. Successful multi-component programs prevent young people from starting to use tobacco in the first place and more than pay for themselves in lives and health care dollars saved.
Strategies that comprise successful comprehensive tobacco control programs include mass media campaigns, higher tobacco prices, smoke-free laws and policies, evidence-based school programs, and sustained community-wide efforts.
Comprehensive tobacco control programs are most effective when funding for them is sustained at levels recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
1. Was this page helpful?
 Yes   No
Form Approved OMB# 0990-0379 Exp. Date 8/31/2017

 Email Updates Twitter Instagram Facebook YouTube
Home |  About Us |  Accessibility |  Privacy Policy |  FOIA |  Disclaimers |  Plain Writing
No FEAR |  Viewers & Players |  WhiteHouse.gov |  USA.gov |  GobiernoUSA.gov |  Give Feedback

U.S. Department of Health & Human Services |  200 Independence Avenue S.W. |  Washington DC 20201

Does Medical Marijuana Reduce Need for Other Meds?
In states with legal pot, pain prescriptions saw the greatest drop, study found

marijuana
En Español

By Dennis Thompson
HealthDay Reporter

WEDNESDAY, July 6, 2016 (HealthDay News) -- People are actually using medical marijuana as a treatment for health problems, not simply as an excuse to get high, a new study suggests.

States that pass medical marijuana laws tend to experience a significant decline in prescriptions for ailments that could be treated with cannabis, said study senior researcher W. David Bradford. He's the chair of public policy with the University of Georgia's Department of Public Administration and Policy.

At the same time, there hasn't been a decline in prescriptions for drugs that treat conditions for which marijuana wouldn't help much or at all, Bradford said.

"There was a substantial shift away from the use of [U.S. Food and Drug Administration]-approved drugs when states turned their medical marijuana laws on," Bradford said.

Patients most often use medical marijuana to treat pain, causing a large decrease in the average daily doses of prescription painkillers, the researchers reported.

Given this, medical marijuana could play a role in reducing overdose deaths caused by prescription opiates, such as oxycodone (Oxycontin), hydrocodone (Vicodin), morphine and codeine, Bradford said.

"If you never start using an opiate, then you're not put on the path to opiate misuse, opiate abuse and death," he said.

For this study, researchers analyzed data from Medicare Part D, a federal program that covers prescription drugs for seniors. The study included all prescriptions filled by Medicare Part D enrollees from 2010 to 2013.

The investigators compared states that had legalized medical marijuana against states that hadn't, to see if the availability of pot to patients made any difference in prescription drug trends.

The research team specifically looked at nine conditions for which marijuana might be considered a substitute for FDA-approved medications -- anxiety, depression, glaucoma, nausea, pain, psychosis, seizures, sleep disorders and spasticity.

Pain is the condition for which there's the strongest medical evidence recommending marijuana use, the researchers said. Accordingly, they found that legal pot had the greatest effect on prescriptions for painkillers.

There were 1,826 fewer daily doses of painkillers prescribed on average per year in states with medical marijuana laws, compared to states where pot is outlawed, the findings showed.

That's three to four times greater than the reductions found in prescriptions for other marijuana-treatable conditions, including anxiety, depression, nausea, psychosis, seizures and sleep disorders, Bradford said. Reductions for those conditions were significant, but averaged between 265 and 562 daily doses annually.

The only drugs not significantly affected by medical marijuana laws target glaucoma and spasticity. Those two diseases have shown the least proven benefit from cannabis, the researchers said.

For example, marijuana can decrease eye pressure caused by glaucoma by about 25 percent, but the effect lasts only an hour. That makes pot an unrealistic option for glaucoma treatment, the study authors said. Their data showed that daily doses of glaucoma medication increased by an average 35 daily doses per year in states with medical marijuana laws.

The researchers also found that medical marijuana laws caused no change at all in drugs for which cannabis cannot be considered a substitute, including antibiotics and antivirals, Bradford said.

According to Dr. David Katz, these results show that marijuana -- "not a dangerous drug, in the grand scheme of things" -- could serve as a valuable alternative to FDA-approved drugs that come with worse side effects. Katz is director of the Yale University Prevention Research Center in New Haven, Conn.

"What we want in medicine is to use the right thing for the right patient at the right time -- something that relieves a disease, does it more effectively than anything else, and does it with a high margin of safety," Katz said. "This research indicates that marijuana is populating exactly such a niche."

Medical marijuana "is not the right choice for everybody, but there will be people for whom it is the right choice," he continued. "We're counting on well-trained physicians to apply sound judgment."

Medical pot also appears to have saved taxpayers some money. By 2013, 17 states and the District of Columbia had implemented medical marijuana laws, and lower prescription drug use in those states added up to $165 million in savings, the study authors reported.

Marijuana could help treat pain for the same reason that it also can help treat depression and anxiety, by altering a person's mood, said Dr. Daniel Carr. He is president of the American Academy of Pain Medicine and director of pain research at Tufts University School of Medicine in Boston.

"Pain wouldn't be pain unless there was an unpleasant emotion tagged onto it. This emotional aspect of pain is as important as the sensory aspect of pain," Carr said. "Marijuana's effects on mood could also alleviate the experience of pain, from the patient's point of view."

However, Carr said more research needs to be done on marijuana for it to serve as a true alternative to prescription drugs.

"The quality of the evidence for medical marijuana is really rudimentary," he said. "I don't think we have a full grasp yet on the long-term risks and benefits of medical marijuana."

The new study was published in the July issue of the journal Health Affairs.

More information

For more on medical marijuana, visit the U.S. National Institute on Drug Abuse.

SOURCES: W. David Bradford, Ph.D., chair of public policy, University of Georgia; David Katz, M.D., director, Yale University Prevention Research Center, New Haven, Conn.; Daniel Carr, M.D., president, American Academy of Pain Medicine, and director of pain research, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston; July 2016, Health Affairs

Last Updated: Jul 6, 2016

Copyright © 2016 HealthDay. All rights reserved.

HealthDay TV
Play
Dating Apps and Self-Esteem                
Dating Apps and Self-Esteem
RELATED STORIES
Mental Illness May Make Teens Vulnerable to Drugs, Alcohol
Don't Shrug Off Shoulder Safety When Playing Summer Sports
Acupuncture May Slow Pre-Dementia Memory Loss: Study
Some Advanced Kidney Cancer Patients May Postpone Treatment
New Guidelines Issued for Cancer Patients' Post-Treatment Pain
Pain Raises Risk of Opioid Addiction
RELATED ARTICLES
Mental Illness May Make Teens Vulnerable to Drugs, Alcohol
Mental Illness May Make Teens Vulnerable to Drugs, Alcohol
Don't Shrug Off Shoulder Safety When Playing Summer Sports
Don't Shrug Off Shoulder Safety When Playing Summer Sports
Acupuncture May Slow Pre-Dementia Memory Loss: Study
Acupuncture May Slow Pre-Dementia Memory Loss: Study
Some Advanced Kidney Cancer Patients May Postpone Treatment
Some Advanced Kidney Cancer Patients May Postpone Treatment
RELATED TOPICS
Vomiting and Nausea News
Marijuana News
Legal Health News
Misc. Therapy and Procedures Health News
Misc. Sleep Problems News
Seizure Health News
Pain Health News
Medicare News
Health Cost News
Anxiety News
Home HealthDay TV Wellness Library HealthDay en Español Privacy Policy Physician's Briefing License Our News About HealthDay Ad Policy Contact Us

Logo: Tobacco In Australia: Facts and Issues

Button: GO (Submit form)
            Next Chapter
Home » Chapter 6: Addiction » 6-0 introduction

6.0 Introduction
 Show / hide chapter menu
Much of this chapter is based on information in the reports of the US Surgeon General (The Health Consequences of Smoking. Nicotine Addiction, 19881) and of the Tobacco Advisory Group of the Royal College of Physicians (Nicotine Addiction in Britain, 20002), both of which provide extensive, fully referenced reviews of the chemical, physiological and psychoactive properties of nicotine. Readers requiring more detailed information are referred to these publications.
Nicotine is the drug in the tobacco plant that causes tobacco users to become addicted to cigarettes and other tobacco products.1, 2 An essence of tobacco was first extracted in the early 1800s and named 'Nicotianine' to commemorate Jean Nicot, the French diplomat and scholar who introduced tobacco to the French court in the late 1500s. German scientists in Heidelberg isolated the pure form of Nicotianine in 1828, calling it 'Nikotin,' but it took another century before its addictive nature was first suspected.1 Research during the 1920s and 1930s linked nicotine with the dependency observed among tobacco users. In 1942, Johnston showed that injections of pure nicotine reduced his need to smoke tobacco and concluded: 'Smoking tobacco is essentially a means of administering nicotine, just as smoking opium is a means of administering morphine'.3 p 742
The publication of major reports on smoking and health in the 1960s confirmed the role of nicotine in perpetuating tobacco use.1 However the prevailing view at the time was that tobacco smoking was best understood as a socially learned behaviour, and that it reflected a psychological 'habituation' rather than physical addiction.4 Treatment options for smoking cessation primarily used psychological models of behaviour modification. This was to change over the next 20 to 30 years, as awareness increased of the physiological role of nicotine in tobacco addiction.2
In a report of the US Surgeon General in 1979, persistent tobacco use was described as 'the prototypical substance-abuse dependency'.5 p 1–32 In 1980, the American Psychiatric Association for the first time included tobacco use in its Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders as a substance abuse disorder, signalling a greater emphasis on the psychoactive effects of nicotine, and a move towards viewing tobacco addiction through a disease model. The US National Institute on Drug Abuse took a similar stance during the 1980s.1
The report of the US Surgeon General in 1988 focused solely on nicotine and concluded that (p9):1
1.	Cigarettes and other forms of tobacco are addicting.
2.	Nicotine is the drug in tobacco that causes addiction.
3.	The pharmacologic and behavioural processes that determine tobacco addiction are similar to those that determine addiction to drugs such as heroin or cocaine.
The US Surgeon General's report of 2000 argued: 'Tobacco dependence is in fact best viewed as a chronic disease with remission and relapse'.6 The Royal College of Physicians' report in the same year observed: 'Doctors, other health professionals and indeed society as a whole, need to acknowledge nicotine addiction as a major medical and social problem' (pxvi).2
Cigarettes are now commonly understood to be a highly efficient nicotine delivery system that both causes and sustains addiction.2, 7, 8 Nicotine is a drug that 'captures' more of its users than do 'hard' drugs such as heroin and cocaine.1, 2 The tobacco industry has long recognised addiction to nicotine as the primary motivation for persistent smoking,9 and has worked since the 1960s to make cigarettes as efficient as possible in delivering doses of nicotine to the brain's receptors.7–9 These aspects of product development are discussed further in Chapter 12.

Why People Smoke
• Why People Smoke

• Interview #1

• Interview #2

• Why Do You Smoke? Test

• Reading & Writing Activities: Finding the Main Idea

Unit 4

Unit 5

Unit 6

Bibliography

Why People Smoke

Most people start smoking when they are in their teens and are addicted by the time they reach adulthood. Some have tried to quit but have returned to cigarettes because smoking is such a strong addiction. It is a habit that is very difficult to break. There are many different reasons why people smoke.

Three of the main reasons that young people smoke are to look mature, to be like their friends, and to experiment. Since teens see older people all around them smoking, especially their parents and relatives, they smoke to act older. If their friends or peers smoke, they may feel pressured into doing the same to be accepted. The last reason is the excitement of experimenting with something that is forbidden. In Massachusetts it is against the law for anyone under 18 years old to smoke. Usually parents do not allow their under age teens to smoke. Therefore, smoking becomes very attractive. It is exciting to get cigarettes and sneak away to smoke without being caught.

Adults smoke for other reasons. They may have a lot of stress and pressures because of economic and personal problems. They may be unemployed or working but not making enough money to take care of themselves and their families. They may be homeless, or they may be dealing with alcohol or cocaine/heroin addictions. Some may be in bad marriages or relationships in which there is physical and/or verbal abuse. All these people may smoke to feel relaxed or to give them energy while going through a hard time.

Whether young or old, some people smoke to control their weight. Smokers, on the average, weigh seven pounds less than non-smokers. Smoking reduces a person's appetite. It lessens his/her sense of taste and smell. This could be why ex-smokers gain weight after quitting cigarettes. Food tastes and smells so much better.

Finally, there are people who say they love to smoke. Smoking gives them pleasure. It just makes them feel good.

Researchers Medical & Health Professionals Patients & Families Parents & Educators Children & Teens
NIDA
 
Home
Drugs of Abuse
Related Topics
Publications
Funding
News & Events
About NIDA
Print
Home » Publications » Research Reports » Tobacco/Nicotine » Is Nicotine Addictive?
Tobacco/Nicotine
Is Nicotine Addictive?

Tobacco PlantsMost smokers identify tobacco use as harmful and express a desire to reduce or stop using it, and nearly 35 million want to quit each year.
Yes. Most smokers use tobacco regularly because they are addicted to nicotine. Addiction is characterized by compulsive drug seeking and abuse, even in the face of negative health consequences. It is well documented that most smokers identify tobacco use as harmful and express a desire to reduce or stop using it, and nearly 35 million of them want to quit each year. Unfortunately, more than 85 percent of those who try to quit on their own relapse, most within a week.

Research has shown how nicotine acts on the brain to produce a number of effects. Of primary importance to its addictive nature are findings that nicotine activates reward pathways—the brain circuitry that regulates feelings of pleasure. A key brain chemical involved in mediating the desire to consume drugs is the neurotransmitter dopamine, and research has shown that nicotine increases levels of dopamine in the reward circuits. This reaction is similar to that seen with other drugs of abuse and is thought to underlie the pleasurable sensations experienced by many smokers. For many tobacco users, long-term brain changes induced by continued nicotine exposure result in addiction.

Nicotine’s pharmacokinetic properties also enhance its abuse potential. Cigarette smoking produces a rapid distribution of nicotine to the brain, with drug levels peaking within 10 seconds of inhalation. However, the acute effects of nicotine dissipate quickly, as do the associated feelings of reward, which causes the smoker to continue dosing to maintain the drug’s pleasurable effects and prevent withdrawal.

Nicotine withdrawal symptoms include irritability, craving, depression, anxiety, cognitive and attention deficits, sleep disturbances, and increased appetite. These symptoms may begin within a few hours after the last cigarette, quickly driving people back to tobacco use. Symptoms peak within the first few days of smoking cessation and usually subside within a few weeks. For some people, however, symptoms may persist for months.

Although withdrawal is related to the pharmacological effects of nicotine, many behavioral factors can also affect the severity of withdrawal symptoms. For some people, the feel, smell, and sight of a cigarette and the ritual of obtaining, handling, lighting, and smoking the cigarette are all associated with the pleasurable effects of smoking and can make withdrawal or craving worse. Nicotine replacement therapies such as gum, patches, and inhalers may help alleviate the pharmacological aspects of withdrawal; however, cravings often persist. Behavioral therapies can help smokers identify environmental triggers of craving so they can employ strategies to prevent or circumvent these symptoms and urges.

PrevNext
This page was last updated July 2012

Is Nicotine Addictive?
Contents
Letter From the Director
What Are the Extent and Impact of Tobacco Use?
How Does Tobacco Deliver Its Effects?
Is Nicotine Addictive?
Are There Other Chemicals That May Contribute to Tobacco Addiction?
What Are the Medical Consequences of Tobacco Use?
Are There Safe Tobacco Products?
Tobacco Use and Comorbidity
Smoking and Pregnancy— What Are the Risks?
Smoking and Adolescence
Are There Gender Differences in Tobacco Smoking?
Are There Effective Treatments for Tobacco Addiction?
New Frontiers in Tobacco Research
Glossary
References
Where Can I Get Further Information About Tobacco/Nicotine?
Ordering Publications

Call 1-877-643-2644 or:
NIDA Drug Pubs

Español
PDF (1MB)
ePub (368KB)
Kindle (656KB)
Online Only
Smoking Quitline
For help from the National Cancer Institute: 1-877-44U-QUIT (1-877-448-7848)

The National Cancer Institute's trained counselors are available to provide information and help with quitting in English or Spanish, Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Eastern Time.

Learn more


Featured Publications

Principles of Substance Abuse Prevention for Early Chil...
Science of Addiction Cover
Drugs, Brains, and Behavior: The Science of Addiction
Publication cover for Marijuana: Facts Parents Need to Know
Marijuana: Facts Parents Need to Know
Marijuana: Facts for Teens Publication Cover
Marijuana: Facts for Teens
More
NIDA Notes: The Latest in Drug Abuse Research
​Research Reports
This series of reports simplifies the science of research findings for the educated lay public, legislators, educational groups, and practitioners. The series reports on research findings of national interest.
Logo: Tobacco In Australia: Facts and Issues

Button: GO (Submit form)
            Next Chapter
Home » Chapter 10: Tobacco Industry » 10.0 Introduction

10.0 Introduction
 Show / hide chapter menu
The selling of tobacco is a globalised operation resulting in a global health burden.1 In only a few nations (e.g. China, the US, Japan and Egypt) is the tobacco market controlled by companies headquartered in that country.2 Tobacco companies may be either government operated or publicly traded companies. Fourteen countries have major state-owned tobacco companies, accounting for approximately 40% of world cigarette consumption. (When excluding China this figure is only about 5%.) Most of these operations are based in the Middle East/Africa region and Asia Pacific.3 Government ownership alone is not always predictive of a lack of resolve to implement strong tobacco control measures. For example, the Thai Tobacco Monopoly is government owned, yet Thailand is internationally recognised as having one of the world’s most advanced tobacco control programs.4 Privatisation of formerly state owned tobacco companies has been shown to lead to decreased cigarette taxes, overturned tobacco control legislation and increased tobacco consumption and prevalence.5,6
The cigarette business is now primarily concentrated in the hands of five tobacco companies that collectively control about 90% of the world’s cigarette market, four of which are publicly traded corporations. The global tobacco industry produces more than 5400 billion cigarettes a year. The biggest single market is China, where the industry is state owned, with approximately 350 million smokers who account for more than 40% of the global total. Four international tobacco companies—Philip Morris International, British American Tobacco, Japan Tobacco and Imperial Tobacco—account for some 45% of the global market, or around three-quarters of the market outside China.7

Big tobacco firms are maintaining their poise, but quietly wheezing
Jan 25th 2014 | From the print edition
Timekeeper 

“CIGARETTE smoking is a health hazard of sufficient importance in the United States to warrant appropriate remedial action.” It was 50 years ago this month that America’s surgeon-general sounded that warning, marking the beginning of the end of cigarette manufacturing—and of smoking itself—as a respectable activity. Some 20m Americans have died from the habit since then. But advertising restrictions, smoking bans and stigma have had their effect: the proportion of American adults who smoke has dropped from 43% to 18%; smoking rates among teenagers are at a record low. In many other countries the trends are similar.

The current surgeon-general, Boris Lushniak, marked the half-century with a report on January 17th, declaring smoking even deadlier than previously thought. He added diabetes, colorectal cancer and other ailments to the list of ills it causes, and promised “end-game strategies” to stamp out cigarettes altogether.

In this section
Running out of puff
Gearing up for a fight
Diversifying the board
Patch-up job
The Lord’s outsourced work
Fighting the system
The not so Golden State
Reprints
Were that to happen America’s three big tobacco firms, Altria, Reynolds and Lorillard, could be snuffed out, too. Public-health officials plot the same fate for multinationals that supply other markets. The hit list includes Philip Morris International (PMI), which along with Altria makes Marlboro, the top-selling global brand; Japan Tobacco; and British American Tobacco and Imperial Tobacco of Britain.

They are a hardy bunch, unlikely to be spooked. But the methods they have used to withstand a half-century of battering by regulators may be losing potency. In the rich world, where the economy is sluggish, smokers are trading down to cheaper puffs. The regulatory climate in developing countries is becoming more hostile. New technologies such as e-cigarettes promise to deliver nicotine less riskily. Big tobacco firms may master them, but it would be a radical shift, akin to converting the car industry from internal-combustion engines to battery power. David Adelman of Morgan Stanley, an investment bank, does not “see anything that’s upending the conventional tobacco business model.” But the model needs tweaking.


Some reasons for Mr Adelman’s confidence are sound. Advertising bans and the industry’s pariah status deter would-be competitors. When cigarette-makers raise prices, smokers cough up. Global consumption keeps rising, thanks largely to population growth in poorer countries. The cigarette giants pamper investors with big dividends and share buy-backs; they have flocked to tobacco shares (see chart).

But the going is getting tougher. This month health officials in China, home to more smokers than any other country, called for a ban on smoking in public places. That would mainly affect state-owned China Tobacco, which has a near-monopoly. But multinationals’ shares wobbled anyway: the proposed crackdown could portend tighter regulation elsewhere. Britain’s government, after some wavering, may now go ahead and copy Australia’s requirement for cigarettes to be sold in ugly, scary “plain packs”.

Such pleasure-pinching regulation strikes at one of the main ways cigarette companies boost profits: converting smokers to pricier brands. “Premiumisation” is still happening in developing countries, where incomes are rising. But elsewhere smokers are turning to cheaper brands or rolling their own cigarettes. Many smokers will not trade back up once the economy improves, largely because smoking and advertising bans have robbed the habit of its air of glamour. Euromonitor International, a research firm, forecasts that everywhere except in Asia and the Middle East prices will rise less from 2012 to 2017 than they did during the previous five years.


Death rate comparison and consumption
Shane MacGuill of Euromonitor sees in all this “a very serious threat to the long-term health of the tobacco industry.” This is spurring a quest for safer methods of supplying smokers with their nicotine fixes. Most of the hype is about e-cigarettes, which give users a hit of vapour infused with nicotine but none of the other, nastier ingredients of tobacco smoke. In America, the fastest adopter, sales have jumped from nearly nothing five years ago to at least $1 billion in 2013.

At first, it looked as if e-cigarettes might lure smokers from the big tobacco brands to startups such as NJOY. But incumbents have been quick to see the threat. Lorillard acquired Blu, now the biggest American brand, in 2012. Altria and Reynolds are expected to launch e-cig ventures nationwide this year. Imperial recently acquired the e-cigarette operations of Dragonite, a Chinese firm that pioneered the technology. Though not the first movers, tobacco companies have bigger war chests, more knowledge of smokers’ habits and better ties to distributors than the newcomers.

Some pundits reckon Americans will puff more e-cigarettes than normal ones within a decade, but tobacco folk are sceptical. E-cigs account for just 1% of America’s cigarette market. In Europe 7% of smokers had tried “vaping” by 2012 but only 1% kept it up. PMI has higher hopes for a new type of cigarette, which heats tobacco rather than burning it. Such cigarettes could deliver fewer toxins than conventional sticks and more pleasure than mere vapour. PMI says it will invest up to €500m ($677m) in a factory in Italy to make them.

Earlier efforts to hook smokers on heated tobacco flopped, so there is no assurance that PMI’s versions will succeed. And no one knows what sort of restrictions regulators will eventually place on “reduced risk” products, including e-cigarettes.

If they can manage the transition to less harmful smokes, and convince regulators to be sensible, the tobacco giants could keep up the sort of performance that has made their shares such a fine investment over the years. But some analysts are not so sure. Many tobacco firms “are struggling to deliver the consistency of the earnings-per-share model we’ve seen in the past,” says David Hayes of Nomura. If that persists, investors may fall out of love with the industry. A half-century after the surgeon-general’s alarm, they, and incorrigible puffers, are its last remaining friends.

Special Report: When it comes to e-cigs, Big Tobacco is concerned for your health
LONDON | BY MARTINNE GELLER

The health warning on a MarkTen electronic cigarette package is 116 words long.

That's much longer than the warnings on traditional cigarette packs in the United States. Nicotine, the e-cigarette warning says, is "addictive and habit-forming, and it is very toxic by inhalation, in contact with the skin, or if swallowed." It is not intended for women who are pregnant or breast-feeding, or people ... who take medicine for depression or asthma. "Nicotine can increase your heart rate and blood pressure and cause dizziness, nausea and stomach pain," says MarkTen, a leading brand in the United States. The ingredients can be "poisonous."

MarkTen's parent company Altria, maker of Marlboro cigarettes, said the language seemed appropriate. There is no required health warning on electronic cigarettes in the United States, so "we had to do what we thought was right," said a spokesman for Altria Client Services.

The company's frankness about the perils of nicotine dates back to the late 1990s, when it led a campaign for cigarettes to be regulated by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Small tobacco companies at the time said the big guys would use regulation to seal their dominance. Today, small e-cigarette makers are saying the same thing. Many argue that firms like Altria and Reynolds American want hefty rules to help neutralize the threat that e-cigarettes pose to their businesses. By accentuating the risks of 'vaping,' they say, big firms may deter smokers from trying the new devices, even though most scientists agree they are safer.

"If you read that (warning) as a smoker, you might think 'Oh, I'll just stick with a cigarette,'" said Oliver Kershaw, a former 15-a-day-smoker who quit through e-cigarettes and founded websites that advocate them.

Big tobacco companies have pushed for a range of controls on e-cigarettes. These include lengthy health warnings, reduced product ranges, restricted sales, and scientific testing requirements. Kershaw and others say such efforts risk squeezing small players. Too many rules would stifle innovation and reduce the range of products to "a very simple, utilitarian e-cigarette," said Fraser Cropper, CEO of Totally Wicked, an independent e-cigarette company based in the UK.

Big tobacco companies say their goal in pushing for firm control is not to hurt smaller competitors. Regulation will benefit consumers and e-cigarette companies alike by ensuring safety and quality standards and boosting confidence, they say. Small companies should not be exempt from responsible behavior.

"Our stated goal is to get to e-vapor leadership, to have the strongest brands in the marketplace," said the Altria spokesman. He could not predict the impact of increased regulation on smaller firms. "I don't know how they run their businesses and what it would cost them to meet those requirements."

Most anti-tobacco campaigners agree that e-cigarettes should be regulated. But some believe they deserve a lighter touch than tobacco because they can help smokers quit, and may be less harmful than smoking.

Measures that make e-cigarettes less appealing or hard to come by may keep people smoking, these people say. Clive Bates, a former head of UK charity Action on Smoking and Health (ASH), thinks public health officials who advocate tough controls end up helping Big Tobacco's conventional brands.

"They really are all doing their utmost to protect the cigarette trade," Bates said. "They just don't realize it." He thinks regulations should encourage smokers to quit, or switch.

The image of e-cigarettes is already changing. The proportion of people in Britain who think vaping is just as harmful as smoking doubled last year to 15 percent, according to a survey by ASH. In the United States, a similar picture is emerging. The growth in U.S. sales of e-cigarettes slowed to 5 percent in the fourth quarter last year from 19 percent a year earlier, according to Wells Fargo analyst Bonnie Herzog. She attributes that partly to increased uncertainty about the products.

Derek Yach, a director at Vitality Institute, a health research company, doubts there is any "conspiratorial effort" to crush the new business. But he says that "if the dominant message is one of doubt, then the status quo gets maintained." Yach once headed tobacco control at the World Health Organization and worked at PepsiCo.

Japan Tobacco International, the world's third-largest tobacco company, thinks strict regulations could hurt young firms. "If you make it extremely hard (to comply), you would drive small companies out of business," said Ian Jones, JTI's head of scientific and regulatory affairs for emerging products. "You would lose the value of the category, you would lose the spark."

"OPEN SYSTEMS"

E-cigarettes came onto the market a decade ago promising a safer nicotine fix. The devices heat nicotine-laced liquid to create an inhalable vapor, rather than burn tobacco. That gives smokers the traditional hand-to-mouth ritual without the deadly smoke.

The global vaping market, which could top $7 billion this year, is evenly split between cigarette look-alikes, often sold by tobacco companies, and refillable "vapors, tanks and mods" - devices which users modify to suit their needs. These are often made by smaller firms. Demand for them is growing three times as fast as the overall market, as users say they find them more satisfying than early all-in-one models.

Serious devotees favor such refillable "open systems" that let them mix and match liquids and batteries to vary their nicotine intake. Open systems are often sold in vape shops and lend an edgy, do-it-yourself creativity to the vaping community. According to Wells Fargo, there are now around 8,500 vape shops in the United States and 19,400 globally. Vape shops account for about one-third of all U.S. sales, while the Internet accounts for another third. 

In August, Reynolds – which does not produce mods - urged the FDA to "ban open system e-cigarettes, including all component parts." Such systems, Reynolds wrote, present a "unique risk for adulteration, tampering and quality control."

If the FDA does not want a ban, Reynolds suggested, it should regulate vape shops as manufacturers. That would subject them to FDA inspection, registration, manufacturing standards and product clearance requirements.

Vape shops often mix nicotine and flavoring, just as pharmacies compound drugs, said Richard Smith, communications manager at Reynolds. This means "the vape shop seller is a manufacturer under the applicable laws and regulations."

E-cigarette independents say such a move targets them; analysts note that the business model of big tobacco firms depends on mass production, not mix-and-match.

"I think they (Reynolds) probably want that snuffed out before it gains traction," said Philip Gorham, an Amsterdam-based tobacco analyst at Morningstar.

Reynolds says that's not true. "We fully support innovation in tobacco products, including vapor products," said Smith. The company wants "a level playing-field where all manufacturers are subject to equal treatment."

DOING THEIR DUTY

Shane MacGuill, a tobacco analyst at market research firm Euromonitor International, said Reynolds' move may seem zealous, but companies have a duty to shareholders: "It would be remiss ... of them not to try and push for the competitive environment that is as favorable to them as possible."

Steven Parrish, a former Altria executive who retired in 2008, said that as long as people are honest, there's nothing wrong with advocating to protect their interests. And embracing regulation can help the tobacco industry win trust.

"I think one of the things the industry would like to see ... is a world in which the tobacco industry is much more like the pharmaceutical industry in terms of how it operates," he said: "Very heavily regulated and maybe not loved and admired, but at least acknowledged as a legitimate business."

That makes young people a particularly sensitive point of tension.

Most e-cigarette companies want tighter controls on who can buy, such as a minimum age. Altria's NuMark goes further. It says U.S. purchases should also be "clerk-assisted or conducted in an otherwise non-self-service environment."

Smaller e-cigarette makers say that would hand a big advantage to tobacco companies.

U.S. convenience stores are the main outlets for tobacco products. Tobacco firms offer the stores rich incentives to promote their brands, and according to Morningstar, tobacco can provide more than a third of stores' profit. Cigarettes can only be sold behind the counter. They are displayed on heavily branded shelving which the tobacco firms often provide.

Putting e-cigarettes behind the counter would force the products to compete for consumer attention in space that tobacco firms influence, small companies say.

"As long as you say it has to be 12 feet from a child's hand at the counter, it guarantees (the e-cigarette) gets onto their wall," said Jan Verleur, CEO and co-founder of VMR, a Miami-based e-cigarette company.

Altria says retailers choose how and where to display products.

EARLY WARNINGS

Some small e-cig firms are pushing back. Totally Wicked is challenging Europe's Tobacco Products Directive (TPD), which was adopted in 2014 and comes into force in 2016.

It's up to member states to apply the EU rules in their own way, but the directive says manufacturers must tell regulators what's in a new product six months before launch. Producers will have to list ingredients, emissions, toxicological data, nicotine doses and uptake, as well as health effects. A new notification is required for every big change.

Totally Wicked is fighting the TPD in the EU Court of Justice in Luxembourg. Such detailed reporting is more onerous even than for traditional cigarettes, the company argues. It says it is disproportionate, considering that e-cigarettes are probably less harmful. Its CEO says the six-month notification would slow innovation in an industry where manufacturers can move from concept to shelf in 10 weeks.

British American Tobacco's Nicoventures unit agrees with Totally Wicked that the six-month notice period "runs the risk of stifling innovation," according to a spokeswoman.

But global tobacco leader Philip Morris International – which used to be part of Altria - said it thinks this kind of advance notification is appropriate to ensure standards. Its own tests already go beyond the TPD rules, a spokeswoman said. Robust scientific research is "something we believe in as the core of our work in this new product category."

In the United States, the FDA aims to deliver its final ruling on e-cigarettes in June. E-cigarette firms there say anything that requires lengthy and costly trials could be manageable for big business but may hurt smaller companies. "The more science that's required, the more expensive it becomes," said Sanjiv Desai, general counsel of U.S. e-cigarette firm VMR.

A spokesman for the FDA said it was weighing the burden on everyone, including small manufacturers. It plans to help small companies by phasing in new rules. The European Union also plans to give firms time to adapt. It has said clear rules will help smaller firms; it plans to assess the costs of notification.

For Yach, the former WHO tobacco official, regulators should remember that e-cigarettes are more than a new business. "A heavy smoker has a 20 times greater risk of lung cancer," Yach said. "Switch to e-cigarettes and that risk is virtually going to zero."

(Edited by Sara Ledwith)

Stanford Report, December 12, 2011
Tobacco industry dying? Not so fast, says Stanford expert
Smoking is not going away. Worldwide, says Stanford historian Robert Proctor, the tobacco industry continues to create toxic products that cause not just lung cancer but also cataracts, ankle fractures, early onset menopause, spontaneous abortion and erectile dysfunction, among other maladies.

BY CYNTHIA HAVEN

Steve Fyffe and L.A. Cicero

'The industry has spent tens of billions designing cigarettes since the 1940s – that's from the industry's own documents,' Robert Proctor said.
The cigarette industry is not dying. It continues to reap unimaginable profits. It's still winning lawsuits. And cigarettes still kill millions every year.

So says Stanford's Robert Proctor, author of the new bombshell study, Golden Holocaust: Origins of the Cigarette Catastrophe and the Case for Abolition, a book the tobacco industry tried to stop with subpoenas and hundreds of thousands of dollars in legal fees.

Proctor, the first historian to testify in court against the tobacco industry (in 1998), warns that the worst of the health catastrophe is still ahead of us: Thanks to the long-term effects of cigarettes, "If everyone stopped smoking today, there would still be millions of deaths a year for decades to come."

"Low-tar" cigarettes? "Light" cigarettes? Better filters? Forget it, he said. They don't work. Today's cigarettes are deadlier even than those made 60 years ago, gram for gram.

Half the people who smoke will die from their habit. A surprising number will die from stroke and heart attacks, not cancer.

Moreover, he asks, "How many people know that tobacco is a major cause of blindness, baldness and bladder cancer, not to mention cataracts, ankle fractures, early onset menopause, ectopic pregnancy, spontaneous abortion and erectile dysfunction?"

Six trillion cigarettes are smoked every year – that's 6,000,000,000,000. Proctor said that's "enough to make a continuous chain from Earth to the sun and back, with enough left over for a couple of round trips to Mars."

L.A. Cicero
Robert Proctor with collection of cigarette ads and packages
'There's hundreds of things people don't know about smoking,' Robert Proctor said.
His 750-page book, a decade in the making, has already earned high praise, with terms like "a real page-turner," "a must-read," "the most important book on smoking in 50 years."

"This book is a remarkable compendium of evil," wrote Columbia's David Rosner, an author of Deceit and Denial: The Deadly Politics of Industrial Pollution. "It will keep you spinning from page one through the last. … It is the type of book that makes you wonder how, in God's name, this could have happened."

According to Donald Kennedy, Stanford president emeritus and former editor of the journal Science, the book "unpacks the sad history of an industrial fraud. [Proctor's] tightly reasoned exploration touches on all topics on which the tobacco makers lied repeatedly to Congress and the public."

The hefty book has not only won him accolades, but it's personally cost Proctor $50,000 in legal fees to defend himself against the industry, which subpoenaed his email and unpublished manuscript.

According to an article in The Nation last year, Proctor is one of only two historians who currently testify on behalf of smokers injured by tobacco products; 50 have testified on behalf of the industry. Academics from virtually every discipline have been collaborating with the Marlboro Men – and made big money doing so.

"This is the biggest breach of academic integrity since the Nazis," he said, and "certainly the most deadly."

Such language is typical for Proctor. When it comes to cigarettes, he speaks in provocative superlatives, pulling no punches.

Cigarettes are "the deadliest artifact in the history of civilization" – more than bullets, more than atom bombs, more than traffic accidents or wars or heroin addiction combined. They are also among "the most carefully and most craftily devised small objects on the planet."

"The industry has spent tens of billions designing cigarettes since the 1940s – that's from the industry's own documents," he said.

Old ad of two famous women promoting a brand of cigarette
He also marshals evidence to show that smoking contributes substantially to environmental damage, even global warming: "When we finally decide to take seriously the problem of global climate change, cigarettes will come under increasing scrutiny. Tobacco agriculture and cigarette manufacturing have heavy carbon footprints – think deforestation and petrochemical pesticides – and cigarettes are leading causes of fires and industrial accidents. There's not much room for cigarettes in an environmentally conscious world."

For the industry, though, the cigarette represents the perfect business model. "It costs a penny to make. Sell it for a dollar. It's addictive," says investment guru Warren Buffett. Proctor notes that "by artfully crafting its physical character and chemistry, industry scientists have managed to create an optimally addictive drug delivery device, one that virtually sells itself."

"There's hundreds of things people don't know about smoking," said Proctor. Myths have instead lulled the public into complacency. He listed a few of the most common:

Myth #1. Nobody smokes anymore. If you read the media, smoking sounds like a dying habit in California. That's far from true, said Proctor. Californians still smoke about 28 billion cigarettes per year, a per capita rate only slightly below the global average.

So why do we have this illusion? "We don't count the people who don't count. It's not the educated or the rich who smoke anymore, it's the poor," said Proctor.

Also, look at popular social trends – the recent trendiness of cigars, for example. Or the current fad for hookah parties. He recalled one such event at Stanford: "They would never have a Marlboro party. But hookah is just as addictive, and just as deadly."

Myth #2. The tobacco industry has turned over a new leaf. "The fact is that the industry has never admitted they've lied to the public or marketed to children or manipulated the potency of their project to create and sustain addiction," Proctor said. "A U.S. Federal Court in 2006 found the American companies in violation of RICO racketeering laws, and nothing has changed since then. And the same techniques used in the past in the U.S. are now being pushed onto vulnerable populations abroad."

Myth #3. Everyone knows that smoking is bad for you. Proctor pointed out that most people begin smoking at the age of 12 or 13, or even younger in some parts of the world. "Do they know everything?" Proctor asked rhetorically. "And how many people know that cigarettes contain radioactive isotopes, or cyanide, or free-basing agents like ammonia, added to juice up the potency of nicotine?"

Old cigarette ad with a dentist promoting a brand of cigarette
Myth #4. Smokers like smoking, and so should be free to do it. And the industry has a right to manufacture cigarettes, even if defective. Proctor called this "the libertarian argument."

"It is wrong to think about tobacco as a struggle between liberty and longevity; that tips the scales in favor of the industry. People will always choose liberty, as in 'Give me liberty or give me death.' What people don't realize is that most smokers dislike the fact they smoke, and wish they could quit. Cigarettes are actually destroyers of freedom."

There are tobacco industry documents, he noted, in which smoking is compared not to drinking but rather to being an alcoholic. Proctor also points to how we handle other forms of toxic pollution: "We don't allow kids to play with toys coated with lead paint. We don't drive cars that don't meet safety standards."

The upshot: "People should be free to smoke wherever it harms no one else, but cigarettes as now designed are too dangerous to be produced or sold."

Myth #5. The tobacco industry is here to stay. Global tobacco use would be declining were it not for China, where 40 percent of the world's cigarettes are made and smoked. Proctor has a bet with a colleague, though, that China will be among the first to bar the sale of cigarettes, once their financial costs are recognized. Governments throughout the world have benefited from tobacco taxes, which he calls "the second addiction." The costs of paying for diseases caused by smoking are high, however – especially when you count lost productivity – and governments will start winding down on tobacco, he says, once this is taken seriously.

Proctor also said that in the United States, a "Kafkaesque world" divides smokers and non-smokers. The industry has computerized databases of virtually all smokers and spends over $400 per smoker per year on special offers, coupons, sign-ups and other direct mail approaches – an unseen world to non-smokers. "This is precisely how the industry wants it; a fungus always grows best in the dark," he writes.

Proctor admits to a personal motivation for his research. Three of his grandparents died from smoking – one from emphysema, another from lung cancer and a third from a heart attack in his mid-50s. The family blamed the last death on eating too many eggs. "That's the story," said Proctor, "but he smoked nonstop."

For Proctor, then, his engagement with Big Tobacco is more than just research: "It's part of my sense of what it means to be an ethical human being, using my expertise to do what's right for humanity on the planet."

Logo: Tobacco In Australia: Facts and Issues

Button: GO (Submit form)
            Next Chapter
Home » Chapter 11: Advertising » 11.0 Backgrounds

11.0 Background
 Show / hide chapter menu
Australia got off to a slow start compared to other English-speaking Commonwealth countries in introducing bans on the broadcast of tobacco advertisements on television and radio, but since the 1980s Australia has been a pioneer in the control of tobacco advertising and promotion. As early as the 1960s, tobacco control advocates such as Dr Cotter Harvey, founder of the Australian Council on Smoking and Health (ACOSH), and Dr Nigel Gray, then director of the Anti-Cancer Council of Victoria (now Cancer Council Victoria), aimed to put tobacco advertising on the political agenda. Legislation to ban advertising of tobacco products was ACOSH's first major goal1 and Gray's most important target in his lifelong commitment to cancer prevention.2 Both men wrote countless letters on the topic and tirelessly sought representations with government ministers at both state and national levels. Dr Gray alone wrote to 14 different Ministers for Communication under seven different governments over the following 20 years.3 In 1971, with smoking rates at record levels and frustrated by the slow pace of change, the Cancer Council produced a groundbreaking series of television commercials featuring high-profile TV actors and comedians parodying popular tobacco advertisements of the time and enlisting the support (including in another advertisement) of Nobel prize-winning Victorian virologist Sir Macfarlane Burnet.i It was not until 1973 that a ban on the broadcast of advertisements for tobacco products was finally introduced.
Direct cigarette advertising on radio and television was phased out over the three years between 1 September 1973 and 1 September 1976. Advertising which was construed as 'accidental or incidental' to a broadcast or transmission was allowed to continue, a provision included as a late amendment to the legislation before it was passed in 1976. There is little doubt that this amendment occurred in direct response to tobacco industry lobbying. The tobacco industry had already managed to ensure major exposure on television in the US following a direct advertising ban by engaging in sponsorship of sport: they planned to do the same in Australia, provided the legislation gave them the opportunity. Internal industry documents from the 1970s record the Australian general manager of Rothmans stating that the imminent:
… the reason for the existence of the Rothmans National Sport Foundations and our sponsorships which are being developed in anticipation of restrictive advertising action in Australia.' 4
In October 1988, the then Minister for Health, the Hon. Dr Neal Blewett, stated his support for a national ban on tobacco advertising in newspapers and magazines, advising that he would proceed with legislation provided he had the support of the states. In the following year Australian Government support was gained for a ban in the recommendations of the Parliamentary Joint Committee on the National Crime Authority. In May 1989, that committee, comprising representatives from all major political parties, unanimously recommended to parliament that tobacco advertising be completely banned. In August 1989, Democrat Senator Janet Powell announced her intention to table the Smoking and Tobacco Products Advertisements (Prohibition) Bill, which proposed a ban on tobacco advertising in the print media, billboards and cinema, and to outlaw sporting sponsorship. The legislation was subsequently amended by the government to include print media (locally produced newspapers and magazines), but to exclude cinema, billboard and sponsorship advertising, on the grounds that these more correctly fell within state jurisdictions. The Smoking and Tobacco Products Advertisements (Prohibition) Act was passed on December 28, 1989.5
New legislation passed in Victoria, South Australia and Western Australia between 1987 and 1990 sought to outlaw tobacco advertising through sport and the arts. Elsewhere in Australia the 'accidental or incidental' exemption in the Broadcasting Act and the 1989 legislation continued to allow advertising of tobacco products on player uniforms and at sporting venues. These were clearly readable in television broadcasts and newspaper photographs throughout the entire country. The association of sports people with tobacco was hugely beneficial to the image of tobacco products. Sponsorship of sport and the arts also gave tobacco company executives access to politicians in an informal environment at functions associated with sporting and cultural events. With tobacco companies sponsoring all of the football codes (Australian Rules, rugby and soccer), the Australian Opens in tennis and golf, motor racing in all forms, major opera and ballet companies and many other sports, arts and cultural groups, events and festivals, tobacco advertisements were ubiquitous. Sport became the major battleground for further restrictions on tobacco advertising during the early 1990s, particularly after health promotion foundations in Victoria, South Australia, Western Australia and elsewhere demonstrated that alternative sponsors were not so difficult to attract.6
With the passage on 17 December 1992 of the Australian Government's Tobacco Advertising Prohibition Act 1992 (the Act),7 most forms of tobacco sponsorship were phased out by December 1995, with cricket sponsorship concluding on 30 April 1996. (Sponsorship exemptions were granted to events that were of international importance that would otherwise not be held in Australia if sponsorship were banned.) Finally, after 31 December 1995, advertising on billboards, illuminated signs and other outdoor signs could no longer be displayed. The maximum penalty for any regulated corporation to 'knowingly or recklessly' publish, or authorise or cause a tobacco advertisement to be published is 120 penalty units. Under the Act, 'Accidental or incidental' publication of tobacco advertisements is permitted if the advertisement is an accidental or incidental accompaniment to the publication of other matter and the publisher does not receive any direct or indirect benefit (whether financial or not) for publishing the advertisement (in addition to any direct or indirect benefit that the person receives for publishing the other matter).
The WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (WHO FCTC) defines tobacco advertising and promotion as 'any form of commercial communication, recommendation or action with the aim, effect or likely effect of promoting a tobacco product or tobacco use either directly or indirectly' (p4) and requires that each country shall 'undertake a comprehensive ban on all tobacco advertising, promotion and sponsorship' (p11).8 Australia has signed and ratified the treaty and is therefore bound by these terms.
Because of the comprehensiveness of its legislation, in 2001 Australia was described by British American Tobacco Australia officials as having one of the 'darkest markets in the world', rivalled only by Canada, in which to market tobacco products (piii1).2 Despite this situation, marketing of tobacco products continues today. While Australia closed most 'above-the-line' marketing opportunities to tobacco companies, the industry focused instead on non-traditional means of promotion, capitalising on legislative gaps and loopholes. Industry marketing efforts since the later 1990s have included event promotions, trade marketing, in-store displays and innovative packaging.9,10 To address these methods of promotion, since the early 2000s, Australian states and territories introduced retail display bans of tobacco products. Additionally, the Australian Government has introduced the Tobacco Advertising Prohibition Amendment Bill 2010 which seeks to make it an offence to advertise tobacco products on the Internet and in other forms of electronic media. The Internet is clearly a major vehicle by which young people can be exposed to tobacco advertising and promotion and this legislative change aims to bring electronic means of advertising, whether on the Internet or by other electronic means, into line with other restrictions in place for other media. At the time of writing, Australia is introducing world-leading legislation to implement its 29 April 2010 announcement11,12 that, as of 1 July 2012, all tobacco products will be required to be sold in standardised, plain packaging.
This chapter outlines why tobacco advertising is a problem, examines existing Australian national, state and territory tobacco advertising legislation, and details recent and current marketing strategies of the tobacco industry. A glossary of key advertising terms can be found in the box below.
Glossary of key advertising terms
Above-the-line: marketing via the mass media (print, television, radio, posters/billboards and cinema)10
Advertising: any paid form of non-personal presentation and promotion of ideas, goods or services by an identified sponsor13
Below-the-line: marketing via methods other than mass media (print, television, radio, posters/billboards and cinema)10
Branding: the use of a name, term, symbol or design to identify a product14
Buzz marketing: using popular entertainment or news to encourage people to talk about a brand or product15
Dark market: highly restricted marketing environment9
Guerrilla marketing: a form of unconventional marketing, such as chalk messages on a sidewalk, which is often associated with staged events16
Marketing: business activities that direct the exchange of goods and services between producers and consumers16 and includes not only the advertising and other forms of promotion of products but also pricing, packaging and distribution or 'placement' (known as the 'four Ps' of marketing)
Mobile seller: a salesperson who carries tobacco products in a tray or container for the purpose of selling the product directly to customers in venues such as bars or outdoor events
Non-branded advertising: advertising that promotes smoking but contains no specific tobacco brand
Open source marketing: collaboration between consumers and brand owners on the development and promotion of products and services17
Point-of-sale marketing: the arrangements of product and placement of promotional material in retail stores18
Product placement: paid promotion of a product or brand through movies, television and other entertainment media, often incorporated into the storyline19
Promotion: the co-ordination of all seller-initiated efforts to set up channels of information and persuasion to sell goods and services or to promote an idea. The tools can include advertising, direct marketing (communicating directly with consumers), sales promotion (marketing aimed at the sales force or distributors) and public relations (execution of strategies that earn public understanding and acceptance)20
Relationship marketing: the ongoing process of identifying and maintaining contact with high-value consumers16
Social network marketing: unlike traditional forms of marketing that seek to target customers with advertisements, companies and marketers that successfully join in this complex network of relations seek to befriend their customers by incorporating them into cyberspace social networks21
(Tobacco) sponsorship: any form of contribution to any event, activity or individual with the aim, effect or likely effect of promoting a tobacco product or tobacco use either directly or indirectly22
Split packs: tobacco packs that can be divided into multiple, smaller packs once purchased; the smaller packs sometimes do not bear the required health warnings and information
Tobacco display: tobacco products visible at retail stores
Trade marketing: marketing that relates to increasing demand for products at wholesaler, retailer or distributor level rather than more directly at the consumer level
Viral marketing: creating entertaining or informative messages that are designed to be passed along, like a virus, in an exponential fashion, often electronically or by email15
Word-of-mouth marketing: the creation and dissemination of advertising that encourages people to talk about the brand or products; includes buzz marketing and viral marketing, known as word of mouse when conducted electronically15

Tobacco advertising
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Part of a series on
Tobacco
Dunhill Early Morning Pipe Tobacco
History
History of tobacco
Biology
Nicotiana (Nicotiana tabacum)
Nicotine
Tobacco diseases
Types of tobacco
Personal and social impact
Health effects
Prevalence of consumption
Tobacco advertising
Tobacco and art
Tobacco and other drugs
Tobacco control
Tobacco politics
Tobacco smoking
Tobacconist
Production
Cultivation of tobacco
Curing of tobacco
Tobacco industry
Tobacco products
v t e
Tobacco advertising is the advertising of tobacco products or use (typically cigarette smoking) by the tobacco industry through a variety of media including sponsorship, particularly of sporting events. It is now one of the most highly regulated forms of marketing. Some or all forms of tobacco advertising are banned in many countries.

Contents  [hide] 
1	History
1.1	1789–1870
1.2	Color lithography (1870–1900)
1.3	Modern advertising (1920s)
1.4	1930–99
1.5	2000 onwards
2	Campaigns
2.1	1950–70
2.1.1	Targeting youth
2.2	Customer loyalty
2.3	Target markets
2.4	Film
2.5	Web
3	Budgets
4	Advertisement control
4.1	Africa
4.1.1	Zimbabwe
4.1.2	South Africa
4.2	Asia
4.2.1	Hong Kong
4.2.2	Indonesia
4.2.3	Malaysia
4.2.4	Bangladesh
4.2.5	Pakistan
4.2.6	Philippines
4.2.7	Singapore
4.2.8	Taiwan
4.2.9	United Arab Emirates
4.3	Europe
4.3.1	Ireland
4.3.2	United Kingdom
4.3.3	Italy
4.3.4	The Netherlands
4.3.5	Serbia
4.4	North America
4.4.1	United States
4.4.2	Canada
4.4.3	Mexico
4.5	Oceania
4.5.1	Australia
4.5.2	New Zealand
5	Anti-smoking advertising
6	Sponsorship
6.1	Formula One auto racing
6.2	IndyCar auto racing
6.3	NASCAR auto racing
6.3.1	Nicorette tobacco cessation product sponsorship
6.4	Snooker
6.5	Other sports
7	Trends
8	Effectiveness
9	Gallery
10	See also
11	References
12	External links
History[edit]
1789–1870[edit]
This advertisement for "Egyptian Deities" cigarettes depicts an early 20th century woman holding a package of cigarettes.
"Egyptian Deities" advertisement. Early 20th century.
The first known advertisement in the United States was for the snuff and tobacco products of P. Lorillard and Company and was placed in the New York daily paper in 1789. Advertising was an emerging concept, and tobacco-related advertisements were not seen as any different from those for other products: their negative impact on health was unknown at the time. Local and regional newspapers were used because of the small-scale production and transportation of these goods. The first real brand name to become known on a bigger scale in the USA was "Bull Durham" which emerged in 1868, with the advertising placing the emphasis on how easy it was "to roll your own".[1]

Color lithography (1870–1900)[edit]

German cigarette ad by Hans Rudi Erdt (1915)
The development of color lithography in the late 1870s allowed the companies to create attractive images to better present their products. This led to the printing of pictures onto the cigarette cards, previously only used to stiffen the packaging but now turned into an early marketing concept.[2] By the last quarter of the 19th century, magazines such as Punch carried advertisements for different brands of cigarettes, snuff, and pipe tobacco. Advertising was significantly helped by the distribution of free or subsidized branded cigarettes to troops during World War I and World War II. The second invention was a cigarette-making machine developed in the 1880s.[3]

Modern advertising (1920s)[edit]
Modern advertising was created with the innovative techniques used in tobacco advertising beginning in the 1920s.[4][5]

1930–99[edit]

Early 20th-century advertisements of Tobacco products made in Durham, NC

Winchester cigarettes advertisement in front of a drug store in Montreal, Quebec in 1942
Advertising in the decades leading up to World War II consisted primarily of full page, color magazine and newspaper advertisements. Many companies created slogans for their specific cigarettes and also gained endorsements from famous men and women. Some advertisements even contained children or doctors in their efforts to sway new customers to their specific brand. Much of these advertisements sought to make smoking appear fashionable and modern to men and women. Also, since the health effects of smoking weren't entirely proven at this time, the only real opposing argument to smoking was made on moral grounds. However, there were still a substantial number of doctors and scientists who believed there was a health risk associated with smoking cigarettes.[6] During World War II, cigarettes were included in American soldier's C-rations since many tobacco companies sent the soldiers cigarettes for free. Cigarette sales reached an all-time high at this point, as cigarette companies were not only able to get soldiers addicted to tobacco, but specific brands also found a new loyal group of customers as soldiers who smoked their cigarettes returned from the war.[7]


U.S. tobacco ads from the 20th century
After World War II, cigarette companies advertised frequently on television programs. To combat this move by the cigarette companies, the Federal Communications Commission required television stations to air anti-smoking advertisements at no cost to the organizations providing such advertisements. In 1970, Congress took their anti-smoking initiative one step further and passed the Public Health Cigarette Smoking Act, banning the advertising of cigarettes on television and radio starting on January 2, 1971. After the television ban, most cigarette advertising took place in magazines, newspapers, and on billboards. However, in 1999 all cigarette billboard advertisements were replaced with anti-smoking messages, with some of these anti-smoking messages playing parodies of cigarette companies advertising figures and slogans. Since 1984, cigarette companies have also been forced to place Surgeon's General warnings on all cigarette packs and advertisements because of the passing of the Federal Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act.[8] Restrictions on cigarette companies became even tighter in 2010 with the Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control Act. The act prohibits tobacco companies from sponsoring sports, music, and other cultural events and also prevents the display of their logos or products on T-shirts, hats, or other apparel.[9] The constitutionality of both this act and the Food and Drug Administration's new graphic cigarette warning labels are being questioned under cigarette companies' first amendment rights.[10]

2000 onwards[edit]
Some mini motorcycles have a cigarette or other tobacco trademark applied; such branded mini-motorcycles have been found in New Zealand in breach of tobacco advertising legislation.[11]

Campaigns[edit]
1950–70[edit]
Before the 1970s, most tobacco advertising was legal in the United States and most European nations. In the United States, in the 1950s and 1960s, cigarette brands frequently sponsored television shows—most notably To Tell the Truth and I've Got a Secret.

One of the most famous television jingles of the era came from an advertisement for Winston cigarettes. The slogan "Winston tastes good like a cigarette should!" proved to be catchy, and is still quoted today. When used to introduce Gunsmoke (gun = smoke), two gun shots were heard in the middle of the jingle just when listeners were expecting to hear the word "cigarette". Other popular slogans from the 1960s were "Us Tareyton smokers would rather fight than switch!," which was used to advertise Tareyton cigarettes, and "I'd Walk a Mile for a Camel".

In 1954, tobacco companies ran the ad "A Frank Statement." The ad was the first in a campaign to dispute reports that smoking cigarettes could cause lung cancer and had other dangerous health effects.[12]

In the 1950s, manufacturers began adding filter tips to cigarettes to remove some of the tar and nicotine as they were smoked. "Safer," "less potent" cigarette brands were also introduced. Light cigarettes became so popular that, as of 2004, half of American smokers preferred them over regular cigarettes,.[13] According to The Federal Government's National Cancer Institute (NCI), light cigarettes provide no benefit to smokers' health.[14][15]

In 1964, Smoking and Health: Report of the Advisory Committee to the Surgeon General of the United States was published. It was based on over 7000 scientific articles that linked tobacco use with cancer and other diseases. This report led to laws requiring warning labels on tobacco products and to restrictions on tobacco advertisements. As these began to come into force, tobacco marketing became more subtle, and a number of advertisements designed to appeal to children, particularly those featuring Joe Camel resulting in increased awareness and uptake of smoking among children.[16] However, restrictions did have an effect on adult quit rates, with its use declining to the point that by 2004, nearly half of all Americans who had ever smoked had quit.[17]

Targeting youth[edit]
Prior to 1964, many of the cigarette companies advertised their brand by claiming that their product did not have serious health risks. A couple of examples would be "Play safe with Philip Morris" and "More doctors smoke Camels". Such claims were made both to increase the sales of their product and to combat the increasing public knowledge of smoking's negative health effects.[18]

Much cigarette advertising was intended to target youth. Major cigarette companies would advertise their brand in popular TV shows such as The Flintstones and The Beverly Hillbillies, which were watched by many children and teens.[19] In 1964, after facing much pressure from the public, The Cigarette Advertising Code was created by the Tobacco companies, which prohibited advertising directed to youth.[18]

The use of celebrities and famous athletes would also encourage smoking for youth. Popular comedian Bob Hope was used to advertise for cigarette companies.[18] The African-American magazine Ebony often used athletes to advertise major cigarette brands.[20]

Customer loyalty[edit]
Tobacco companies use advertising to drive brand awareness and brand preference amongst smokers, in order to drive sales and to increase brand and customer loyalty. One of the original forms of this was the inclusion of cigarette cards, a collectible set of ephemera.

Target markets[edit]

Woman smoking in Japan
The intended audience of tobacco advertising has changed throughout the years, with some brands specifically targeted towards a particular demographic. According to Reynolds American Inc, the Joe Camel campaign in the United States was created to advertise Camel brand to young adult smokers. Class action plaintiffs and politicians described the Joe Camel images as a "cartoon" intended to advertise the product to people below the legal smoking age. Under pressure from various anti-smoking groups, the Federal Trade Commission, and the U.S. Congress, Camel ended the campaign on 10 July 1997.

Tobacco companies have frequently targeted the female market, seeing it as a potential growth area as the largest market segment has traditionally been male. The introduction of the 1960s Virginia Slims brand, and in particular its "You've Come a Long Way Baby" and "Slimmer than the fat cigarettes men smoke" campaigns, was specifically aimed at women.[21]

When marketing cigarettes to the developing world, tobacco companies use the Western lifestyle as a mechanism to lure this demographic into purchasing their products.[22]

Film[edit]
Universal Pictures has a "Policy Regarding Tobacco Depictions in Films". In films anticipated to be released in the United States with a G, PG or PG-13 rating, smoking incidents (depiction of tobacco smoking, tobacco-related signage or paraphernalia) appear only when there is a substantial reason for doing so. In that case, the film is released with a health warning in end credits, DVD packaging, etc.[23]

Since May 2007, the Motion Picture Association of America may give a film glamorizing smoking or depicting pervasive smoking outside of a historic or other mitigating context a higher rating.[24]

There have also been moves to reduce the depiction of protagonists smoking in television shows, especially those aimed at children. For example, Ted Turner took steps to remove or edit scenes that depict characters smoking in cartoons such as Tom and Jerry, The Flintstones and Scooby-Doo,[25] which are shown on his Cartoon Network and Boomerang television channels.

Video game content rating systems have also looked at the usage of tobacco in video games; a video game depicting the use of tobacco may have a higher rating.

One movie depicting smokeless tobacco use was the 2003 John Travolta movie Basic where smokeless brand Skoal was used.[26][27]

Web[edit]
Both Google and Microsoft have policies that outlaw the promotion of tobacco products on their advertising networks.[28][29] However, some tobacco retailers are able to circumvent these policies by creating landing pages that promote tobacco accessories such as cigar humidors and lighters.

Budgets[edit]
Tobacco companies have had particularly large budgets for their advertising campaigns. The Federal Trade Commission claimed that cigarette manufacturers spent $8.24 billion on advertising and promotion in 1999, the highest amount ever at that time. The FTC later claimed that in 2005, cigarette companies spent $13.11 billion on advertising and promotion, down from $15.12 billion in 2003, but nearly double what was spent in 1998. The increase, despite restrictions on the advertising in most countries, was an attempt at appealing to a younger audience, including multi-purchase offers and giveaways such as hats and lighters, along with the more traditional store and magazine advertising.[21]

Marketing consultants ACNielsen announced that, during the period September 2001 to August 2002, tobacco companies advertising in the UK spent £25 million, excluding sponsorship and indirect advertising, broken down as follows:

£11 million on press advertising
£13.2 million on billboards
£714,550 on radio advertising
£106,253 on direct mail advertising
Figures from around that time also estimated that the companies spent £8m a year sponsoring sporting events and teams (excluding Formula One) and a further £70m on Formula One in the UK.[30]

The £25 million spent in the UK amounted to approximately $0.60 USD per person in 2002. The 15.12 billion spent in the United States in 2003 amounted to more than $45 for every person in the United States, more than $36 million per day, and more than $290 for each U.S. adult smoker.

Advertisement control[edit]

Many governments now require tobacco packaging to carry health warnings
The European Union and World Health Organization (WHO) have both specified that the advertising of tobacco should not be allowed. The WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control, which came into effect on 27 February 2005, requires that all of the 168 countries that agreed to the treaty ban tobacco advertising unless their constitution forbade it.

Some countries also impose legal requirements on the packaging of tobacco products. For example, in the countries of the European Union, Turkey, Australia[31] Iran [32] and South Africa, cigarette packs must be prominently labeled with the health risks associated with smoking.[33] Canada, Australia, Thailand, Iceland, Colombia, Mexico, Brazil and some EU countries have also imposed labels upon cigarette packs warning smokers of the effects, and they include graphic images of the potential health effects of smoking. In Canada, cards are also inserted into cigarette packs, explaining reasons not to smoke and different methods of quitting smoking.

Africa[edit]
Zimbabwe[edit]
In Zimbabwe, tobacco advertising is still permitted on national television.

South Africa[edit]
In South Africa, the Tobacco Products Control Amendment Act was passed in 1999. This act bans all advertising and promotion of tobacco products, including sponsorship and free distribution of tobacco products.

Asia[edit]
Hong Kong[edit]
Tobacco advertising on Hong Kong television was outlawed on 1 December 1990, when the territory was still a British colony. However, some sporting events were still allowed to be sponsored by tobacco companies until it was abandoned by the government in July 1999. It took some years before it was removed from buses and trams until it was completely banned in November 2009.[34]

Indonesia[edit]
	Indonesian Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Peraturan Pemerintah Republik Indonesia Nomor 109 Tahun 2012
In Indonesia, tobacco advertising is still allowed, but showing the cigarette packaging is outlawed. Broadcast of tobacco advertising on Indonesian television is only allowed from 9:30 pm until 5:00 am. Smoking warnings are also shown at the end of the advertisement explaining "Smoking can cause cancer, heart attack, impotency and pregnancy and fetal disorders". As of late December 2013, before January 1, 2014, a new warning is shown explaining "Smoking kills you" with an "18+" sign after it. In 2014, the Indonesian government halted the branding of cigarettes as "light" or "mild" on all smoking packages and has decided to place graphic images on the cigarette packs to show the adverse long-term effects of excessive smoking.

Malaysia[edit]
In Malaysia, the displaying of cigarette packets in advertisements with a general warning on long-time smoking that came into effect in June 1976 has been banned since 1995. However, this has not stopped tobacco companies from advertising their products. There are also restrictions on tobacco advertising after the ban of displaying of cigarette packaging, print media advertising is restricted to only one page and advertising on television should not be more than 15 seconds. They have found ways to continue to build their brands by using brand names for a bistro and cybercafes such as Benson & Hedges Bistro and Sampoerna A International Cyberworld, for stationery, accessories, clothing like Dunhill, Marlboro Classics, Davidoff, Perilly's, Pall Mall, John Player Specials, Winfield and Winston. Tobacco companies also sponsor holiday tours like Mild Seven Seafarers Club, Peter Stuyvesant Travel and Tours, Kent Holidays and Salem Holidays as well as concerts and entertainment events. All of these are indirect advertising strategies employed by tobacco companies. Tobacco advertising continued without the display of cigarette packaging until January 2003, when the Malaysian federal government banned even such indirect advertising of tobacco brands, except in certain establishments licensed to sell tobacco products. Formula One Grand Prix and other sporting events are still allowed to use tobacco sponsorship. In 2009, Malaysian government halted the branding of cigarettes as "light" or "mild" on all smoking packages and has decided to place graphic images on the cigarette packs to show the adverse long-term effects of excessive smoking.

Bangladesh[edit]
Bangladesh became a Party to the WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control on February 27, 2005.

In Bangladesh, tobacco advertising is prohibited in all print and electronic media, including at the point-of-sale. Free and discounted tobacco products are prohibited, but internet tobacco sales and tobacco products bearing non-tobacco brand names are allowed. Although sponsorship by the tobacco industry is not completely prohibited, publicity of the sponsorship is prohibited.

Pakistan[edit]
In 2002, the Pakistani government restricted tobacco advertising in all media; Point of Sale Advertising is still legal however there are some restrictions regarding size are imposed. Some cigarette companies used to provide free cigarettes to patrons of tobacco shops; that, too, was also forbidden in the 2010 regulations. The government have also banned the sale of tobacco to underage people in an effort to crack down on underage smoking.

Philippines[edit]

This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
	Wikisource has original text related to this article:
Republic Act No. 9211: Tobacco Regulation Act of 2003
In the Philippines, tobacco advertising is still allowed, but is now limited to point-of-sale and sari-sari store advertising and promotions in other establishments like restaurants, bars and in select billiard halls. Websites that feature tobacco (like Marlboro) are only limited to smokers 18 years old and above, and minors are not allowed to visit the website.

Formerly until 30 June 2008, tobacco advertising was shown on television, radio, print media, movie theaters, billboards and even sponsoring events. With that plenty of cigarette brands were created and advertised and some are remembered for their jingles and slogans. Most of the advertisements aired on television have portrayed young males almost smoking with the filter tip already in the lips and ready for smoking by lighting up with a lighter, leading to concerns by parents over their children mimicking the actions shown in the aforementioned advertisements.

However, when Republic Act 9211 or the "Act Regulating the Packaging, Use, Sale Distribution and Advertisements of Tobacco Products and for Other Purposes" was passed on 23 June 2003 by President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo,[35] tobacco advertising became limited starting on 1 January 2007. Since 1 July 1993 until 30 June 2008, all tobacco advertising was required to display a health warning by the government indicating that "Cigarette smoking is dangerous to your health" (it is still continued for other areas not affected by the ban and on cigarette packaging prior to March 3, 2016, which was replaced by graphic health warnings). Television (including Philippine cable channels, whether broadcasting foreign or local content) and radio stations would not air tobacco advertising from 7 a.m. to 7 p.m. local time (before R.A. 9211 was passed, it was from 7 a.m. to 5 p.m.), with similar restrictions also implemented in cinemas showing G, PG-13 and R-13 rated movies. Advertising tobacco in print media is now only catered to men 18 years old and above, mostly in men's magazines and newspapers.

Because of the R.A. 9211 being passed, there was a timescale on tobacco advertisements being banned.

Date	What was banned
1 January 2007	Television and radio advertisements
1 July 2007	Movie theater and outdoor advertising
1 July 2008	Print media and sponsorship of events like concerts and sporting events
The R.A. 9211 also restricts advertising on public vehicles like taxis, bus and even the PNR, MRT and the LRT (buses, MRT and the LRT are most common with wrap advertising) and also banned cartoon characters in tobacco advertising that might affect children (like Joe Camel, which was popular in the U.S. and in European countries before it was banned; it is still unclear if this cartoon character went into advertising in the Philippines before the R.A. 9211 was passed). The law also prevents celebrities from endorsing tobacco products in advertising; prior to the R.A. 9211, actors Richard Gomez and the late Rudy Fernandez had promoted a cigarette brand.

Singapore[edit]
In Singapore, tobacco advertising was completely banned on 1 March 1971, whereby all kinds of advertising on newspapers and magazines was strictly prohibited, under the Prohibition of Advertisements relating to Smoking Act, 1970. Tobacco advertisements on radio, television and on neon signs ceased on 31 December 1970, after which only anti-smoking slogans were permitted to be broadcast on television and radio. With the ban on tobacco advertisements for the purpose of anti-smoking, the Ministry of Culture had appealed to coffee shops, hotels, restaurants, canteens, snack bars and bars to co-operate with the government to remove all posters, signs and other forms of advertisements relating to smoking. A Smoking Advertisement Unit was set up by the Ministry, and officers were located in areas that had any type of tobacco advertisement within the few months before the blanket ban on tobacco advertising kicked off on 1 March 1971.[36] Twenty-one years later, in 1992, cigarette advertising in foreign magazines was banned in Singapore.

Singapore similarly requires cigarette manufacturers to print images of mouths, feet and blood vessels adversely affected by smoking.[37][38]

Taiwan[edit]
Article 9 of Taiwan's "Tobacco Hazards Prevention Act" prohibits any form of advertising for any form of tobacco product. Taiwan also prohibits other forms of tobacco promotion, such as "using tobacco products as gift or prize for the sale of other products or for the promotion of other events," or "packaging tobacco products together with other products for sale." Depending on the specific violation, Article 26 penalizes violators with fines ranging from NTD 100,000 to NTD 2,500,000 for each violation.[39]


A Winston sponsored smoking room at Dubai International Airport.
United Arab Emirates[edit]
In the United Arab Emirates, tobacco advertisements are forbidden under federal anti-tobacco law No 15 of 2009, effective from January 21, 2014.

Europe[edit]
All tobacco advertising and sponsorship on television has been banned within the European Union since 1991 under the Television Without Frontiers Directive (1989).[40] This ban was extended by the Tobacco Advertising Directive, which took effect in July 2005 to cover other forms of media such as the internet, print media, radio, and sports events like F1. The directive does not include advertising in cinemas and on billboards or using merchandising – or tobacco sponsorship of cultural and sporting events which are purely local, with participants coming from only one Member State[41] as these fall outside the jurisdiction of the European Commission. However, most member states have transposed the directive with national laws that are wider in scope than the directive and cover local advertising. A 2008 European Commission report concluded that the directive had been successfully transposed into national law in all EU member states, and that these laws were well implemented.[42]

In 2003, the European Union halted the branding of cigarettes as "light" or "mild", saying that this misleads consumers about the dangers of smoking. Stark health warnings such as "Smoking Kills" must now cover at least 30 percent of the front of each packet and 40 percent of the back, and an even greater area where messages are printed in more than one national language.[43]

Within the European Union only Germany and Bulgaria are still allowing billboards advertising tobacco use. Tobacco smoking is still advertised in special magazines, during sporting events, in gas stations and stores, and in more rare cases on television. Some nations, including the UK and Australia, have begun anti-smoking advertisements to counter the effects of tobacco advertising.

In Ukraine, tobacco advertising "in all printed mass media" is forbidden since 1 January 2010.[44]

Some countries, like Finland and Greece have outlawed tobacco advertising on television and radio prior to the ban in 1991.

Ireland[edit]
Tobacco advertising on radio, television and billboards is illegal. From 1 July 2009, in-store tobacco advertising and displays of tobacco were made illegal – Ireland being the first country in the EU (and third in the world, after Canada and Iceland) to do so.[45]

Ireland had planned to adopt the Australian model of plain-packaged cigarettes by the middle of 2015 but is yet to happen.[citation needed]

United Kingdom[edit]
The relevant EU directives banning tobacco advertising apply within the United Kingdom, in addition to UK laws restricting tobacco advertising.


Surreal Benson & Hedges poster at Victoria Station, London, c.1978
The first calls to restrict advertising came in 1962 from the Royal College of Physicians, who highlighted the health problems and recommended stricter laws on the sale and advertising of tobacco products. In 1971, an agreement between the government and the tobacco industry saw the inclusion of health warnings on all cigarette packets. All television commercials for cigarettes were banned on 1 August 1965, although commercials for loose tobacco and cigars continued until 1991.[46][47]

Non-television advertising campaigns were still allowed in the UK but came under stricter guidelines in 1986, which in particular, prevented adverts from actually showing a person smoking. The tobacco producers responded with increasingly indirect and abstract campaigns, among which those of Benson & Hedges and Silk Cut became particularly recognisable. Until about the mid-1990s many corner shops, newsagents and off licences had on their shop signs prominent branding by cigarette brands such as Benson & Hedges, Silk Cut, Regal etc. until the practice was outlawed.

As part of their 1997 election campaign, the Labour Party led by Tony Blair pledged to ban all advertising of tobacco products. When it was not included in their legislative programme it was introduced by Lib Dem peer Tim Clement-Jones and was passed as the Tobacco Advertising and Promotion Act 2002,[48] which banned most remaining forms of advertising according to the following timescale:

Date	What was banned
14 February 2003	General advertising
14 May 2003	Promotions
30 July 2003	Sponsorship of sporting events within the UK
May 2004	Particular advertisements in tobacconists
21 December 2004	Large adverts in shops, pubs and clubs
31 July 2005	Sponsorship of excepted global events; brandsharing
It was banned in Scotland by the Scottish parliament in 2001.[49]

Several exemptions from this legislation remain:

Advertisements that appear within the tobacco industry
Advertisements in publications that are not primarily aimed at a British audience
Advertisements in pubs, clubs and shops, as long as the advert's total size does not exceed that of an A5 piece of paper, with 30% of that being taken up by government health warnings.[50]
Advertisements other than those for cigarettes or hand-rolling tobacco within specialist tobacconists if the sale of cigars, snuff, pipe tobacco and smoking accessories accounts for over 50% of their sales
Direct mail that has been specifically requested
While cigarette vending machines were still allowed in licensed premises (until 1 October 2011 in England, 1 February 2012 in Wales, 1 March 2012 in Northern Ireland and 29 April 2013 in Scotland[51] when a full ban came into force) they were only allowed to display a picture of what was available (one image per brand) and no advertisements could be included on the machine.

Finally, cigarette vending machines were then banned in public areas of all British pubs, clubs and restaurants, with a fine of £2500 for non-compliance.[52]

Famous UK tobacco advertising campaigns have included "You're never alone with a Strand" (a disastrous campaign which led to Strand Cigarettes being taken off the market) and "Happiness is a cigar called Hamlet".

Italy[edit]
In Italy, advertising of tobacco products has been banned since 1962,[53] though ad in magazines remained legal since the late 70s; with a few subsequent changes to the law in 1983[54] and 2004.[55]

The Netherlands[edit]
Tobacco advertising is only allowed in and around special tobacco stores, selling more than 90 kinds of tobacco products. Outside, no more than 2 square meters of advertisements is allowed. Inside the tobacco store, a limited amount of advertising is allowed. Salesman can promote brands inside these stores, however their promotional material only contains dummy-cigarettes. Any other kind of advertising is a serious offense under Dutch law.

Serbia[edit]
In Serbia, tobacco advertising on television, on billboards and in printed media is banned, but advertisements for cigarettes are found within shops and kiosks.[56]

North America[edit]
United States[edit]
In the United States, in the 1950s and 1960s, cigarette brands were frequently sponsors of television programs. One of the most famous television jingles of the era came from an advertisement for Winston cigarettes. The slogan "Winston tastes good like a cigarette should!" proved to be catchy. Another popular slogan from the 1960s was "Us Tareyton smokers would rather fight than switch!," which was used to advertise Tareyton cigarettes. America's first regular television news program, Camel News Caravan, was sponsored by Camel Cigarettes and featured an ashtray on the desk in front of the newscaster and the Camel logo behind him. The show ran from 1949 to 1956.

In June 1967, the Federal Communications Commission ruled that programs broadcast on a television station that discussed smoking and health were insufficient to offset the effects of paid advertisements that were broadcast for five to ten minutes each day. "We hold that the fairness doctrine is applicable to such advertisements," the Commission said. The FCC decision, upheld by the courts, essentially required television stations to air anti-smoking advertisements at no cost to the organizations providing such advertisements.

In April 1970, Congress passed the Public Health Cigarette Smoking Act banning the advertising of cigarettes on television and radio starting on 2 January 1971.[57] The Virginia Slims brand was the last commercial shown, with "a 60-second revue from flapper to Female Lib", shown at 11:59 p.m. on 1 January during a break on The Tonight Show.[58] Smokeless tobacco ads, on the other hand, remained on the air until a ban took effect on 28 August 1986.[59] Recently, even further restrictions took effect under the newly enacted Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control Act. Effective 22 June 2010, the new regulations prohibit tobacco companies from sponsoring sports, music, and other cultural events. Also, tobacco companies can no longer display their logos or advertise their products on T-shirts, hats, or other apparel. Eventually, the law is planned to require almost all tobacco advertisements to consist of black text on a white background, but the constitutionality of that requirement has come under scrutiny.[60]

After 1971, most tobacco advertising was done in magazines, newspapers, and on billboards. Since the introduction of the Federal Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act, all packaging and advertisements must display a health warning from the Surgeon General. In November 2003, tobacco companies and magazine publishers agreed to cease the placement of advertisements in school library editions of four magazines with a large group of young readers: Time, People, Sports Illustrated, and Newsweek.[61]

A 1994 report by the Surgeon General, "Preventing Tobacco Use Among Young People," asserted: "When young people no longer want to smoke the epidemic itself will die." [62] A critical task of public health was counteracting the "indoctrination" of the young when they were most susceptible. Hence the report dismissed as "misguided" the debate as to whether cigarette promotion "caused" young people to smoke; the conclusion was that "Whether causal or not, [promotion] fosters the uptake of smoking, initiating for many a dismal and relentless chain of events"[63]

Passed in 1997, the Tobacco Master Settlement Agreement bans outdoor, billboard, and public transportation advertising of cigarettes in 46 states. It also prohibits tobacco advertising that targets young people, the usage of cartoons (such as the Marlboro Man or Joe Camel) in particular.[64] In the states which have not signed the agreement, billboards are a major venue of cigarette advertising (10% of Michigan billboards advertised alcohol and tobacco, according to the Detroit Free Press[65]).

Most recently, signed into law by President Barack Obama, the Tobacco Control Act became active on 22 June 2010. This act not only placed new restrictions on tobacco marketing but also extensive constraints concerning the circulation of cigarettes and smokeless tobacco to minors. Newly effective with this act, "audio advertisements are not permitted to contain any music or sound effects, while video advertisements are limited to static black text on a white background. Any audio soundtrack accompanying a video advertisement is limited to words only, with no music or sound effects." [66]

Canada[edit]
In Canada, the advertising of tobacco products was prohibited by the Tobacco Products Control Act as of 1988 and all tobacco products must show attributed warning signs on all packaging. Immediately following the passing of the legislation through parliament, RJR-MacDonald (RJR-MacDonald Inc. v. Canada (Attorney General)) filed suit against the Government of Canada through the Quebec Superior Court. It was argued that the act, which originally called for unattributed warnings, was a violation of the right to free speech. In 1991, the Quebec Superior Court ruled in favour of the tobacco companies, deciding that the act violated their right to free speech under the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, as well as being ultra vires. The Crown subsequently appealed to the Supreme Court of Canada.

On 21 September 1995 the Supreme Court of Canada upheld the Tobacco Products Control Act as legal, forcing the tobacco companies operating in Canada to print hazard warnings on all cigarette packs. However, the Court struck down the requirement that the health warnings be unattributed, as this requirement violated the right to free speech, further ruling that it was in the federal government's jurisdiction to pass such laws, as it fell under the peace, order and good government clause. Recently, sin taxes have been added to tobacco products, with the objective of decreasing usage by making the products less affordable. Currently, radio ads, television commercials, event sponsoring, promotional giveaways and other types of brand advertising are prohibited as well as in-store product displays. However, certain forms of advertising are permitted, such as print advertisements in magazines with an adult readership of 85% minimum.

Until 2003, tobacco manufacturers got around this restriction by sponsoring cultural and sporting events, such as the Benson & Hedges Symphony of Fire (a fireworks display in Toronto and Vancouver), which allowed the manufacturers' names and logos to appear in advertisements sponsoring the events, and at the venues. The ban on tobacco sponsorship was a major factor that led to the near-cancellation of the Canadian Grand Prix in Montreal and the du Maurier Ltd Classic, a women's golf tournament on the LPGA tour (now known as the Canadian Women's Open).

In May 2008, retail displays of cigarettes in convenience stores in British Columbia, Manitoba, Ontario, Quebec, Newfoundland and Labrador, New Brunswick, and Nova Scotia have been outlawed. They are now all hidden.[67]

Mexico[edit]

This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Although Mexico has reduced its smoking population by more than half since 1980, it was not until 2008 that the General Law on Tobacco Control was passed by Congress. This law and the Regulations of the General Law on Tobacco Control expressly state that publicity and promotion of tobacco products can only be made through adult aimed magazines, personal communication by mail or displayed in establishments exclusively for adults. In these cases, it is prohibited to understate in any way the health risks of tobacco smoking or associate smoking, explicitly or in a vague manner, with athletic, sportive or popularity images. Since this law came into effect in 2009, all cigarette packages in Mexico contain health warnings and graphic images, created and approved by the Secretariat of Health, that must cover 50% of the pack.[68][69]

Oceania[edit]
Australia[edit]
In 1972 the federal government introduced mandatory health warnings for radio and television cigarette advertisements. In September 1976 a total ban on tobacco & cigarette advertisements on TV & radio commenced. In December 1989 tobacco advertising was banned from all locally produced print media — this left only cinema, billboard and sponsorship advertising as the only forms of direct tobacco advertising.

In 1992 the Tobacco Advertising Prohibition Act 1992 expressly prohibited almost all forms of tobacco advertising in Australia, including the sponsorship of sporting or other cultural events by cigarette brands. Contracts were to be honoured and so domestic sporting and cultural events were allowed to have their corporate sponsorships run their course, but they were no longer allowed to enter into new or renew existing sponsorships. Therefore, by 1998, all domestic sponsorships had expired naturally. However, the Act gave the Federal Minister for Health and Ageing the right to grant exemptions to events "of international significance" that "would be likely to result in the event not being held in Australia" should tobacco advertising be forbidden. A clause in the Act forbade events from applying for an exemption after 1 October 2000, unless they had previously been granted one. By 2006, this had led to only two events being eligible – the Australian Motorcycle Grand Prix and the Australian Formula One Grand Prix. A further clause removed the Ministers right to grant any exemptions for any event held after 1 October 2006: the 2007 Australian Grand Prix therefore featured no tobacco advertising of any sort.

As of December 2013 in Australia, most cigarette packaging carried graphic images of the effects of smoking as well as information about the names and numbers of chemicals and annual death rates. Television ads included video footage of smokers struggling to breathe in hospital. Since then, the number of smokers has been reduced by one quarter.[citation needed]

In April 2010, the Australian government announced plans to prohibit the use of tobacco industry logos, colours, brand imagery or promotional text of tobacco product packaging from 2012, requiring that brand names and product names be displayed in a standard drab brown colour, font style and position in a policy known as "plain packaging".[70] This legislation, the Tobacco Plain Packaging Act 2011, was challenged in the High Court by multiple tobacco manufacturers on the grounds that it exceeded the legislative capacity of Parliament by virtue of s 51(xxxi) of the Constitution. This challenge was dismissed by the High Court.[71]

New Zealand[edit]
Tobacco advertising in New Zealand was outlawed with the passage of the Smokefree Amendment Act 1990.

Prior to this, in 1963 advertisements for tobacco products were withdrawn from radio and television. A decade later in 1973, cigarette advertising was banned on billboards and in cinemas, and print media advertising was restricted to half a newspaper page.

In 1995 all remaining tobacco advertising and sponsorship was banned except for point-of-sale advertising and some tobacco sponsorship exemptions. Point-of-sale advertising ceased on 11 December 1998.

Upon point-of-sale advertising being finally banned in New Zealand there are other examples of tobacco advertising that will still remain. These include the use of tobacco packets as advertisements, exempted tobacco sponsorships, tobacco advertising and sponsorship in imported magazines and on cable television as well as the usual tobacco imagery in movies and television.

Health warnings – generally graphic images of the harmful effects of smoking – are also placed on all tobacco products.

Anti-smoking advertising[edit]
Anti-smoking groups, particularly cancer charities, along with many government health departments have attempted to counter the advertising of tobacco by creating their own advertisements to highlight the negative effects of smoking. The earliest commercials mainly focused on aiding smoking cessation, the increased risk of lung cancer and the problems associated with passive smoking. However, they have become increasingly hard-hitting over the years, with some campaigns now centered around decreased physical attractiveness[72] and the risk of erectile dysfunction.[73] These are more targeted towards younger smokers than previous campaigns. The British government spent £31 million in 2003 as part of their anti-smoking campaign.[74]

In 2005 the European Union launched the "For a life without tobacco" campaign in all its constituent countries to help people quit smoking.[75]

In 2007 and 2008, the New York City Department of Health launched a series of anti-tobacco ad campaigns to promote the city's Quitline and a free nicotine patch and gum program. The first TV spots, "Smoking is Eating You Alive" and "Smoking is Eating You and Your Kids Alive," depict the damage smoking can do to the body. The ads were noted for their graphic nature[76] as well as their effectiveness. The second series of ads launched 16 April 2008.[77] In these, a 58-year-old woman and longtime smoker called "Marie" describes the amputations and pain she has undergone since developing Buerger's disease, a condition that limits blood flow through the arteries and which was tied to her smoking habit.[78]

The Marlboro Man was one of the most successful cigarette advertising campaigns, lasting from the 1960s to the 1990s. The Marlboro brand was promoted by various cowboys, with Wayne McLaren posing for some promotional photographs in 1976. He died of lung cancer in 1992, having appeared in a television spot showing him in a hospital bed. That image was juxtaposed with him during the promotional shoot, with a voiceover warning about the dangers of smoking.[79]

Sponsorship[edit]
Tobacco advertising has been hand-in-hand with many sports internationally. Below are some sports.

Formula One auto racing[edit]

Gold Leaf-sponsored Lotus from 1971

Marlboro sponsored Ferrari (photo from the 2006 Bahrain Grand Prix)

A Team Penske Marlboro-sponsored car in 1994

A Team Penske Verizon-sponsored car in 2009, with an unbranded Marlboro scheme.
Ever since the first appearance of the Red, Gold and White colors of the Imperial Tobacco's Gold Leaf brand sponsorship livery at the 1968 Monaco Grand Prix,[80] teams, drivers and circuits of Formula One (F1) for years had been heavily dependent on the financial backing of sponsors and from the arrival of Gold Leaf for many decades the tobacco industry played a major role in sponsoring the sport.[81] In 1976, West Germany began a trend in outlawing tobacco sponsorships in motor races, followed by the United Kingdom in 1984, starting with major races and outlawing the rest of the sponsorships in later years. In 1992 France did the same.[82] As anti-smoking legislation began to tighten in many parts of the world F1 became an even more important opportunity for cigarette brand promotion. The negotiating skills of the F1 leadership (especially Bernie Ecclestone) were such that in many jurisdictions F1 achieved some exemptions from the rules.[82] However, there is now a blanket ban on advertising in Europe, and the cars are not allowed to show any links with the tobacco companies. As a result, tobacco advertising started to exit F1. In 2000, WilliamsF1 became the first major team to run without tobacco sponsorship,[83] and McLaren later replaced the West brand and no longer have any tobacco sponsors. Renault ended the deal with Mild Seven after the 2006 season, and in the same year British American Tobacco, owners of British American Racing team[84] withdrew from F1, selling the team to Honda. Ferrari on the other hand renewed their arrangements with Philip Morris in 2005 and later in 2011.[85][86]

Through the arrangement, the Marlboro brand in 2007 was legally visible prominently on the cars, jumpsuits and pit crew at three races: at the Bahrain,[87] Monaco and Chinese Grands Prix. Ferrari was the only team backed by a cigarette brand in the 2007 Formula One season. Since the start of the 2008 season, Ferrari has no longer carried Marlboro logos at any races, even those at which tobacco advertising is allowed. It is therefore unlikely that any F1 car will ever directly advertise tobacco again. However the barcode symbol that was used for some time was "subliminally" suggestive of the Marlboro branding, and signified their sponsorship. For part of 2010 and onwards, Ferrari no longer had the barcode symbol; the only signification of sponsorship was the team name, Scuderia Ferrari Marlboro, although the team's logo showed the left side of the Marlboro chevron.[88] However, from the 2011 British Grand Prix, Ferrari dropped the Marlboro sponsor from their official name, and reverted to the name Scuderia Ferrari as their official name, due to ongoing pressure from people against tobacco sponsorship.[89]

IndyCar auto racing[edit]
After a brief stint as the title sponsor for the USAC Championship Trail in 1971, Marlboro joined the sport of Indy car racing in 1986.

The "Marlboro chevron" livery first appeared on the car of Emerson Fittipaldi during the 1986 CART season and 1986 Indianapolis 500. Patrick Racing expanded the sponsorship to two cars in 1987, and in 1990, it moved to the Penske Team. The white and red Marlboro livery became one of the most recognized in the sport, and Marlboro increased their participation by providing title sponsorship for individual races (Marlboro 500 and Marlboro Grand Prix), contingency sponsorships, and bonus awards programs (Marlboro Million). The company also provided extensive ticket promotions and hosted large hospitality engagements at races.

Penske's cars were painted in the full Marlboro livery through 2009, and the team adopted the moniker "Marlboro Team Penske." The paint schemes remained largely consistent, with slight variations over the years, namely a reduction of brand lettering size in the final few years. Penske carried the sponsorship over to the Indy Racing League starting in 2002. In international CART/IRL events where tobacco advertising was banned, as well as IRL races in 2001, 2008, and 2009 (because of MSA restrictions), the cars kept the colors but simply stated the generic "Team Penske" on the sidepods.

Other major tobacco sponsors in the sport during the 1980s through 2000s included Players Ltd., KOOL, and Hollywood. Smokeless tobacco companies also sponsored several entries, with Foyt in a longer-term association with Copenhagen, and Skoal also appearing on cars during the 1980s.

NASCAR auto racing[edit]
NASCAR's top series, the NASCAR Grand National Series, found sponsorship from R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company (RJR) in the early 1970s following the United States ban on television advertising of cigarettes. The "Winston Cup" became the title of the series, and later, some other regional series under NASCAR were also sponsored by the tobacco company (for example, the "Winston West" series). In the mid-1970s, some races began to get partial television coverage, frequently on the ABC sports variety show, Wide World of Sports. While Winston was not able to do commercial advertisements, their name was all over television during races.

Over the many years of their relationship with NASCAR, Winston sponsored several races and prize programs including the Winston 500, The Winston all-star race, the Winston Western 500 and the 1985–97 Winston Million, which awarded a million dollars to a driver who could win a "small slam" of the sport's four Grand Slam events in the same year. From 1998 to 2002, the Winston No Bull 5, a more complex award system, was used. Each year, there were five races (initially the four majors and Indianapolis) selected to be a part of this promotion. Each driver who finished in the top 5 in the previous No Bull 5 race was eligible to win in the next race selected, along with a fan. If one of the eligible drivers won that race, they were awarded with a million dollar bonus.


Jimmy Spencer's RJR-sponsored Camel Ford in 1997
In addition, R.J. Reynolds sponsored its own car for three years with Camel colors. It was driven by Jimmy Spencer.

On 5 February 2003, R. J. Reynolds informed NASCAR that their five-year extension to sponsor NASCAR's premier division signed in July 2002 could be dissolved because of economic concerns at the company.

On 19 June 2003, NASCAR announced at the NASDAQ MarketSite a new deal with Nextel Communications starting in the 2004 season, as the familiar red was replaced with Nextel yellow (Nextel's new colours were announced after the deal had been signed) and by the end of the first season, it was acquired by Sprint. Starting in September 2005, NASCAR began replacing Nextel logos with Sprint logos started appearing in reference to the new sponsor.

When the advertising was rebranded with the Sprint banner, the Turn 11 bridge at Watkins Glen International was rebranded, with new Sprint advertising featuring the tagline "Sprint ahead".[90]

Smaller tobacco companies not covered by the Master Settlement Agreement have attempted sponsorship for portions of the season or circuits. Bailey's, a small tobacco company based in Virginia, featured in 2005 sponsorship of selected races for the Bobby Hamilton Racing team based in Tennessee, and has been the longtime sponsor of the Bailey's 300 at Martinsville Speedway for late model race cars in the region which race at NASCAR-sanctioned tracks.

Under the Master Settlement Agreement, NASCAR was forced to implement a minimum age of 18 in 2002 for the three national series, as they were often paired with each other or other national motorsport series at race meets. Notably, Kyle Busch was ejected from a Truck Series race at Fontana in 2001 for being underage, as the CART race that weekend featured Marlboro, Kool, and Player's sponsorships.

In 2008, during a non-NASCAR sanctioned series, which some NASCAR teams use for driver development, five drivers under the age of 18, most notably Trevor Bayne and Joey Coulter, both of whom eventually won in NASCAR's national series, were forced to sit out a USAR ProCup race at The Milwaukee Mile, because tobacco regulations prohibited underage drivers from racing at the INDYCAR race, which had cars carrying unbranded Marlboro sponsorship from Team Penske. USAR asked the prohibited drivers to participate in the Thursday test before INDYCAR arrived, and allowed an age-legal driver to qualify the car and race, provided they start at the rear of the field. The prohibited drivers would score points for the weekend.[91]

In 2013, with tobacco all but out of North American motorsport, NASCAR changed the minimum age to 16 in the Truck Series for any circuit 1.25 miles or shorter, along with Canadian Tire Motorsports Park, similar to rules in regional series. Two drivers, Chase Elliott and Erik Jones, won at 17 years of age in 2013. Cole Custer, 16, won in 2014.[92]

Nicorette tobacco cessation product sponsorship[edit]
In 2005, GlaxoSmithKline, manufacturer of Goody's Headache Powder, a NASCAR sponsor since 1977, expanded their long-term sponsorship by adding their Nicorette brand of smoking cessation product as a NASCAR official sponsor, and signed with Chip Ganassi Racing and also longtime Goody's Headache Powder (another GSK brand) spokesman and former smoker, Richard Petty would lead their "Commit to Quit" program.

GSK changed its marketing program in 2006, moving to other brands with Ganassi Racing, while Jeff Gordon became GSK's Nicorette leader, with a Nicorette car for two races.

Snooker[edit]
Snooker was badly hit by the British ban on tobacco sponsorship, with several tournaments losing their financial backers. These included:

The World Snooker Championship (Embassy, 1976–2005)
The Masters (Benson & Hedges, 1975–2003)
The Welsh Open (Regal), 1992–2003
The Scottish Open (Regal), 1998–2003
The Regal Masters, 1989–2002
The World Snooker Championship was given special dispensation from the European Union directive until 2005. The Masters went without any sponsorship in 2004, before receiving the backing of Rileys Club the following year. Some players spoke out against the ban, worried that the game would not be able to survive without the financial backing of the tobacco companies.[93][94]

Other sports[edit]
Various sports have relied on sponsorship money from tobacco companies, both for the participants and for competitions. In the United Kingdom, tobacco companies moved into the expanding world of sports sponsorship on a major scale after television advertising of cigarettes was banned in 1965, with the intent of getting round the ban and gaining a de facto free plug for a mass TV audience.

Cricket (Benson and Hedges Cup)[95]
Darts (Embassy World Championship)
Association football (soccer): RJR brand Winston was a sponsor of the 1982 FIFA World Cup whilst fellow brand Camel was a sponsor of the 1986 FIFA World Cup.[96]
Women's Tennis: Virginia Slims
Rugby league: The Silk Cut Rugby League Challenge Cup, The Regal Trophy, The Winfield Cup
MotoGP (including Marlboro Ducati and also the Rizla Suzuki. Rizla+ is a tobacco paper manufacturer owned by Imperial Tobacco and is exempt from tobacco advertising bans because they only produce the paper, not the tobacco itself.)
Skiing: The award given to Canada's top male skier was known as the Export A Cup. Its 1983 winner, Steve Podborski, became one of the first athletes to protest tobacco sponsorship of sport when he refused to accept his award in said event.
Horse racing: Many races in the UK in the 1960s, 1970s and into the 1980s were sponsored by tobacco companies, notably what is now the Juddmonte International Stakes, which was originally the Benson & Hedges Gold Cup when founded in 1972.
Monster truck: From 1990 until 1993, the United States Hot Rod Association's mud racing and monster truck racing series were known as the Camel Mud and Monster Series. The events were later re-branded under its current name, Monster Jam.
NHRA: Winston Drag Racing
IMSA: Camel GT & Camel Lights
Trends[edit]
With the restrictions placed on general advertising, tobacco companies have moved to new promotions to establish new customers and maintain existing ones. For example, Altria has a strategy of growth by promotions that build brand equity through adult consumer experiences.[97] The intent is to reinforce brand loyalty by building consumer communities.

One example is Marlboro's "Outwit the West", a 'by-invitation if you're a smoker' 4-member team-based 'competition' with a series of cryptic brain teasers. The top 20 teams get invited to the Marlboro ranch, a location where it's 'okay to smoke' and food, drinks and activities are paid for by the company. The team with the most correct answers shares a one million dollar prize. Thousands of teams participate.

More generally, Marlboro has been using its mailing database (estimated at 26 million in 2005[98] ) to promote directly with giveaways and general invitations to the Marlboro Ranch. Reinforcement is provided by branded products and by peers.

Social Networking and the Internet. EPC CIGAR COMPANY launched a social networking and internet campaign to market cigars.[99]

Effectiveness[edit]
The actual effectiveness of tobacco advertisement is widely documented. According to Henry Saffer, public health experts say that tobacco advertising increases cigarette consumption and there is much empirical literature that finds a significant effect of tobacco advertising on smoking, especially in children.[100][101][102][103][104][105][106][107] However, Saffer and Chaloupka's empirical results are largely due to "data mining" and do not account for endogeneity of bans.[108] A meta-analysis of the econometric literature is found in J.P. Nelson, "Cigarette Advertising Regulation: A Meta-Analysis," International Review of Law and Economics, 26(2), June 2006, pp. 195–226. A critical review of longitudinal studies is found in J. P. Nelson, "What is Learned from Longitudinal Studies of Advertising and Youth Drinking and Smoking? A Critical Assessment," International Journal of Environmental Research & Public Health, 7(3), March 2010, pp. 870–926.[109]

Gallery[edit]

Belomorkanal – Russian cigarettes 

Hans Rudi Erdt: Problem Cigarettes, 1912 

French Painted Mural Advertisement 

Tobacco display in Munich 

Advertisement for "Murad" Turkish cigarettes 1918 

Advertisement for "Egyptian Deities" cigarettes 1919 

Veterans Stadium Philadelphia 1986 

Early 20th Century Cigarettes in Durham, NC 
See also[edit]
Tobacco marketing and African Americans
Tobacco packaging warning messages
Torches of Freedom
Smoking ban
WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control
Philip Morris v. Uruguay
Circuit de Spa-Francorchamps
Jeff Wigand – former tobacco company executive and whistleblower
Advertising to children
Tobacco usage in sport
References[edit]
Notes
Jump up ^ Bull Durham – Old West Durham Neighborhood Association, North Carolina
Jump up ^ More About Tobacco Advertising and the Tobacco Collections. Scriptorium.lib.duke.edu.
Jump up ^ James, Randy (2009-06-15). "A Brief History Of Cigarette Advertising". TIME. Retrieved 2012-03-25.
Jump up ^ Donald G. Gifford (2010) Suing the Tobacco and Lead Pigment Industries, p.15 quotation:
...during the early twentieth century, tobacco manufacturers virtually created the modern advertising and marketing industry as it is known today.
Jump up ^ Stanton Glantz in Mad Men Season 3 Extra – Clearing the Air – The History of Cigarette Advertising, part 1, min 3:38 quotation:
...development of modern advertising. And it was really the tobacco industry, from the beginning, that was at the forefront of the development of modern, innovative, advertising techniques.
Jump up ^ Markel, Howard (2007-03-20). "Tracing the Cigarette's Path From Sexy to Deadly". The New York Times.
Jump up ^ Vernellia R. Randall (1999-08-31). "The History of Tobacco". Academic.udayton.edu. Retrieved 2012-03-25.
Jump up ^ "Federal Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act of 1966 | Federal Trade Commission" (PDF). Ftc.gov. Retrieved 2015-12-23.
Jump up ^ "Regulations Restricting the Sale and Distribution of Cigarettes and Smokeless Tobacco". Fda.gov. Retrieved 2012-03-25.
Jump up ^ "New Cigarette Warning Labels Pack More Visual Punch | The Rundown News Blog | PBS NewsHour". PBS. 2011-06-21. Retrieved 2012-03-25.
Jump up ^ [1] “Tobacco advertising on mini-motors”, H Darling and A I Reeder, Tobacco Control 2006; 15;34- doi:10.1136/tc.2005.014084, Retrieved 17 January 2016.
Jump up ^ Daily Doc: TI, Jan 4, 1954: The 'Frank Statement' of 1954. Tobacco.org. 30 September 2000. Retrieved 17 July 2009.
Jump up ^ Light but just as deadly, by Peter Lavelle. The Pulse, 21 October 2004.
Jump up ^ The Truth About "Light" Cigarettes: Questions and Answers, from the National Cancer Institute factsheet
Jump up ^ 'Safer' cigarette myth goes up in smoke, by Andy Coghlan. New Scientist, 2004
Jump up ^ While D, Kelly S, Huang W, Charlton A (17 August 1996). "Cigarette advertising and onset of smoking in children: questionnaire survey". BMJ 313 (7054): 398–9. doi:10.1136/bmj.313.7054.398. PMC 2351819. PMID 8761227.
Jump up ^ Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) (November 2005). "Cigarette smoking among adults—United States, 2004". MMWR Morb. Mortal. Wkly. Rep. 54 (44): 1121–4. PMID 16280969.
^ Jump up to: a b c John W. Richards, Jr., Joe B. Tye and Paul M. Fischer, "The Tobacco Industry's Code of Advertising in the United States: Myth and Reality", Tobacco Control, Vol. 5, (Winter 1996), pp. 297
Jump up ^ Richard W. Pollay, "Promises, Promises: Self-Regulation of US Cigarette Broadcast Advertising in the 1960s", Tobacco Control, Vol. 3, (Summer 1994), pp. 141-142
Jump up ^ Richard W. Pollay, Jung S. Lee and David Carter-Whitney, "Separate, but Not Equal: Racial Segmentation in Cigarette Advertising", Journal of Advertising, Vol. 21, (Mar. 1992), pp. 55-56
^ Jump up to: a b Statement: Surgeon General's Report on Women and Tobacco Underscores Need for Congress to Grant FDA Authority Over Tobacco (Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids). Tobaccofreekids.org.
Jump up ^ Nichter, M., and Elizabeth Cartwright 1991. Saving the Children for the Tobacco Industry. MEDICAL ANTRHOPOLOGY QUARTERLY 5 (3):236- 256.
Jump up ^ Universal Pictures' "Policy Regarding Tobacco Depictions in Films". Universalpictures.com.
Jump up ^ Film rating board to consider smoking as a factor. Mpaa.org.
Jump up ^ Turner to ax smoking scenes from cartoons. MSNBC (21 August 2006).
Jump up ^ http://smokefreemovies.ucsf.edu/movie/48700
Jump up ^ Rabinoff, Michael (2006). "Chapter 8". Ending the Tobacco Holocaust. Elite Books. p. 232. ISBN 9781600700194.
Jump up ^ Advertising.microsoft.com. Advertising.microsoft.com (28 September 2011).
Jump up ^ Adwords.google.com. Adwords.google.com.
Jump up ^ Ash.org.uk
Jump up ^ Tobacco – Health warnings Australian Government Department of Health and Ageing. Retrieved 29 August 2008.
Jump up ^ Tobacco Labelling Regulation Tobacco Labelling Regulation Centre. Retrieved 07 July 2014.
Jump up ^ Public Health at a Glance – Tobacco Pack Information. Web.worldbank.org (27 February 1999).
Jump up ^ Legislation.gov.hk. Legislation.gov.hk.
Jump up ^ Act Regulating the Packaging, Use, Sale Distribution and Advertisements of Tobacco Products and for Other Purposes, No. 9211 of June 23, 2003. Retrieved on December 28, 2015.
Jump up ^ Blanket Ban on Cigarette Ads from 1 March, The Singapore Herald, 6 February 1971
Jump up ^ Coming: new anti-smoking warnings, Arti Mulchand, The Straits Times, 17 May 2006
Jump up ^ New gory images to jolt smokers to quit, Arti Mulchand, The Straits Times, 3 June 2006
Jump up ^ "Tobacco Hazards Prevention Act". http://law.moj.gov.tw. Laws & Regulations Database of The Republic of China. January 23, 2009. Retrieved February 4, 2013. External link in |work= (help)
Jump up ^ Television Without Frontiers Directive 1989. eur-lex.europa.eu.
Jump up ^  European Union – Tobacco advertising ban takes effect 31 July 
Jump up ^ EC.europa.eu. (PDF).
Jump up ^ EU Stops "Light" and "Mild" Cigarette Branding (10/02/03). No-smoking.org.
Jump up ^ Tobacco, alcohol advertising bans take effect in printed media, Kyiv Post (1 January 2010)
Jump up ^ "Philip Morris Limited and Independent Retailer Announce Joint Lawsuit Challenging Irish Tobacco Display Ban". Reuters. 5 October 2009.
Jump up ^ Jenkins, Stephanie. "Cigars, cigarettes, and tobacco". UK television adverts 1955–1990. United Kingdom: Headington, Oxford. Retrieved 6 October 2012. Cigarette and tobacco advertising was banned from UK television in 1965, while cigar advertising was banned in 1991.
Jump up ^ "Classic Ads". Spots and Spot Innovation, TV Toolbox. London SW1P 1JA, United Kingdom: Thinkbox TV Ltd. 2008. Retrieved 17 April 2009. Cigar commercials were banned from our screens in 1991
Jump up ^ Tobacco Advertising and Promotion Act 2002 (c. 36). Opsi.gov.uk (22 November 2012).
Jump up ^ Christie B (28 July 2001). "Scottish parliament urged to ban tobacco advertising". BMJ 323 (7306): 184. doi:10.1136/bmj.323.7306.184/a. PMC 1172784.
Jump up ^ Health | Tobacco advert rules introduced. BBC News (21 December 2004).
Jump up ^ "Tobacco bans come into force". Scotland.gov.uk. 2013-04-28. Retrieved 2015-12-23.
Jump up ^ Hartley-Parkinson, Richard (3 October 2011). "Stubbed out: Cigarette vending machines in pubs outlawed to stop underage smoking". Daily Mail (London).
Jump up ^ L. 10-4-1962 n. 165 Divieto della propaganda pubblicitaria dei prodotti da fumo. Pubblicata nella Gazz. Uff. 30 aprile 1962, n. 111. (in Italian). (PDF).
Jump up ^ L. 22-2-1983 n. 52 Conversione in legge, con modificazioni, del decreto-legge 10 gennaio 1983, n. 4, concernente regime fiscale degli apparecchi di accensione, variazione delle relative aliquote di imposta di fabbricazione, disposizioni sulla reggenza degli uffici dell'Amministrazione autonoma dei monopoli di Stato e modifiche delle sanzioni per le violazioni al divieto di pubblicità ai prodotti da fumo. Pubblicata nella Gazz. Uff. 26 febbraio 1983, n. 56. (in Italian). (PDF).
Jump up ^ D.Lgs. 16-12-2004 n. 300 Attuazione della direttiva 2003/33/CE in materia di pubblicità e di sponsorizzazione dei prodotti del tabacco. Pubblicato nella Gazz. Uff. 20 dicembre 2004, n. 297. (in Italian). (PDF).
Jump up ^ "Serbia 2003" (PDF). World Health Organization.
Jump up ^ History of Tobacco Regulation*. Druglibrary.org.
Jump up ^ "Cigarette Commercials Ended With $1M Fling," The News (Frederick, Md.), 2 January 1972, p1
Jump up ^ "Smokeless tobacco ads banned on TV," Atchison (Kan.) Daily Globe, 28 August 1986, p1; ftc.gov
Jump up ^ "Regulations Restricting the Sale and Distribution of Cigarettes and Smokeless Tobacco". Food and Drug Administration. Archived from the original on 21 October 2010.
Jump up ^ Tobacco Ads Will Be Removed from School Magazines Archived 14 January 2006 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ "Preventing Tobacco Use Among Young People: A Report of the Surgeon General" [2]
Jump up ^ Bayer R (March 2002). "Tobacco, commercial speech, and libertarian values: the end of the line for restrictions on advertising?". Am J Public Health 92 (3): 356–9. doi:10.2105/AJPH.92.3.356. PMC 1447076. PMID 11867307.
Jump up ^ "Truth Initiative". Legacyforhealth.org. Retrieved 2015-12-23.
Jump up ^ ACS:: December Mixed Month for Tobacco Opponents Archived 13 April 2005 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ Herington, Matthew R. "Tobacco Regulation In The United States: New Opportunities And Challenges," Health Lawyer 23.1 (2010): 13–17.[3]
Jump up ^ "Cigarette display ban begins in Quebec, Ontario". CBC News. 31 May 2008.
Jump up ^ [4]. cic.ipn.mx.
Jump up ^ [5]. cic.ipn.mx.
Jump up ^ "Cigarettes to be sold in plain packets from 2012". News Limited. Retrieved 28 April 2010.
Jump up ^ JT International SA v Commonwealth of Australia (2012) 250 CLR 1
Jump up ^ Stop smoking start living – Home. Uglysmoking.info.
Jump up ^ Stop smoking start living – Home. Stayinghard.info.
Jump up ^ "Has the tobacco ad ban worked?". BBC News. 13 February 2004. Retrieved 9 April 2010.
Jump up ^ HELP – For a life without tobacco. Help-eu.com (13 May 2012).
Jump up ^ Peyser, Andrea. (17 March 2008) "Ads Turn TV into an 'Eww'Tube". New York Post
Jump up ^ NYC Department of Health Press Release: "Health Department Launches Nicotine Patch and Gum Giveaway; New TV Ads Feature Marie, a Bronx Smoker who Quit by Calling 311" April 16, 2008. Nyc.gov.
Jump up ^ NY1 News "Former Smoker's Story Is Latest Weapon In City's Anti-Smoking Campaign" Kafi Drexel April 15, 2008
Jump up ^ Snopes.com. Snopes.com.
Jump up ^ Grandprix.com. Grandprix.com (10 March 2007).
Jump up ^ Grandprix.com. Grandprix.com (13 October 2000).
^ Jump up to: a b Grandprix.com. Grandprix.com (5 May 2005).
Jump up ^ Gray, Will (15 April 2003). "Formula One: Williams reverse tobacco trend". The Daily Telegraph (London). Retrieved 9 April 2010.
Jump up ^ Grandprix.com. Grandprix.com (10 March 2007).
Jump up ^ Grandprix.com. Grandprix.com (7 August 2009).
Jump up ^ "Marlboro extend Ferrari sponsorship deal to 2015". F1Fanatic. 14 June 2011. Retrieved 10 July 2011.
Jump up ^ Grandprix.com. Grandprix.com (15 April 2007).
Jump up ^ Formula-one.speedtv.com. Formula-one.speedtv.com (8 July 2010).
Jump up ^ Cooper, Adam (8 July 2011). "Ferrari Drops Marlboro From Team Name". Speed. Retrieved 8 July 2011.
Jump up ^ Nasdaq.com. Nasdaq.com.
Jump up ^ Drivers Not Eligible to Race at Milwaukee. USARfans.com (30 April 2008).
Jump up ^ NASCAR Chairman Brian France says fan input played role in new car – NASCAR News | FOX Sports on MSN. Msn.foxsports.com (17 November 2012).
Jump up ^ BBC SPORT | Other Sports | Snooker | Davis and Hendry demand change. BBC News (18 September 2002).
Jump up ^ BBC SPORT | Other Sports | Snooker | Davis attacks tobacco ban. BBC News (30 January 2003).
Jump up ^ Rediff.com, cricket channel – Ban on tobacco sponsorship may hit sport]
Jump up ^ http://www.fifa.com/mm/document/fifafacts/misc-fwcpartn/52/01/15/fs-401_01_fwc-partners.pdf
Jump up ^ Altria – Media – Press Release – 11/05/2004 – 01 Archived 23 August 2006 at the Wayback Machine.
Jump up ^ Leader Of The Packs. Businessweek.com (30 October 2005).
Jump up ^ Levere, Jane L. (25 February 2010). "Choosing a Marketing Plan: Traditional or Social Media?". The New York Times. Retrieved 9 April 2010.
Jump up ^ Botvin GJ, Goldberg CJ, Botvin EM, Dusenbury L (1993). "Smoking behavior of adolescents exposed to cigarette advertising". Public Health Rep 108 (2): 217–24. PMC 1403364. PMID 8464979.
Jump up ^ Evans N, Farkas A, Gilpin E, Berry C, Pierce JP (October 1995). "Influence of tobacco marketing and exposure to smokers on adolescent susceptibility to smoking". J Natl Cancer Inst. 87 (20): 1538–45. doi:10.1093/jnci/87.20.1538. PMID 7563188.
Jump up ^ Richard W. Pollay; S. Siddarth; Michael Siegel; Anne Haddix; Robert K. Merritt; Gary A. Giovino; Michael P. Eriksen (April 1996). "The Last Straw? Cigarette Advertising and Realized Market Shares among Youths and Adults, 1979–1993". Journal of Marketing (American Marketing Association) 60 (2): 1–16. doi:10.2307/1251927. JSTOR 1251927.
Jump up ^ Arnett JJ, Terhanian G (1998). "Adolescents' responses to cigarette advertisements: links between exposure, liking, and the appeal of smoking". Tob Control 7 (2): 129–33. doi:10.1136/tc.7.2.129. PMC 1759675. PMID 9789930.
Jump up ^ Biener L, Siegel M (March 2000). "Tobacco marketing and adolescent smoking: more support for a causal inference". Am J Public Health 90 (3): 407–11. doi:10.2105/AJPH.90.3.407. PMC 1446173. PMID 10705860.
Jump up ^ Lam TH, Chung SF, Betson CL, Wong CM, Hedley AJ (April 1998). "Tobacco advertisements: one of the strongest risk factors for smoking in Hong Kong students". Am J Prev Med 14 (3): 217–23. doi:10.1016/S0749-3797(97)00071-8. PMID 9569223.
Jump up ^ Choi WS, Ahluwalia JS, Harris KJ, Okuyemi K (May 2002). "Progression to established smoking: the influence of tobacco marketing". Am J Prev Med 22 (4): 228–33. doi:10.1016/S0749-3797(02)00420-8. PMID 11988378.
Jump up ^ Saffer H, Chaloupka F (November 2000). "The effect of tobacco advertising bans on tobacco consumption". J Health Econ 19 (6): 1117–37. doi:10.1016/S0167-6296(00)00054-0. PMID 11186847.
Jump up ^ Nelson J.P. (August 2003). "Cigarette Demand, Structural Change, and Advertising Bans: International Evidence, 1970–1995, B.E". Journal of Economic Analysis and Public Policy/Contributions: 1–27.
Jump up ^ MDPI.com. MDPI.com.
Bibliography
"Timeline: Smoking and disease" at BBC News. Retrieved 12 July 2005.
"The history of smoking" at ForestOnline. Retrieved 12 July 2005.
"Women and smoking – A report of the Surgeon General 2001". Retrieved 12 July 2005.
Myers, Matthew L. 27 March 2001. "Statement: Surgeon General's Report on Women and Tobacco Underscores Need for Congress to Grant FDA Authority Over Tobacco (Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids) Statement: Surgeon General's Report on Women and Tobacco Underscores Need for Congress to Grant FDA Authority Over Tobacco]". Retrieved 12 July 2005.
"Tobacco advertising and promotion" at ASH.org.uk. Retrieved 12 July 2005.
Pritcher, Lynn. "More About Tobacco Advertising and the Tobacco Collections Tobacco advertising]" at the Emergence of Advertising in America (EAA). Retrieved 13 July 2005.
"Formula One tobacco sponsorship ban scrapped" at BBC News, 5 November 1997. Retrieved 9 July 2005
"Formula One tobacco advertising to go" at BBC News, 3 December 1997. Retrieved 9 July 2005.
20 June 2005. "Tobacco Ads Will Be Removed from School Magazines Tobacco Ads Will Be Removed from School Magazines]" at ConsumerAffairs.com. Retrieved 18 July 2005.
Steinhart, Yael, Ziv Carmon, and Yaacov Trope (2013), Distant Warnings of Adverse Side-Effects can Backfire Psychological Science, 24 (9), 1842-1847.
Wheeler, Brian. 13 February 2004. "Has the tobacco ad ban worked?" at BBC News. Retrieved 18 July 2005.
June 2004. "ASH briefing: The UK ban on tobacco advertising" at ASH.org.uk
"BBC NEWS | Health | Tobacco advert rules introduced Tobacco advert rules introduced]" at BBC News. Retrieved 18 July 2005.
"RJ Reynolds hints at leaving NASCAR" at The Sporting News. Retrieved 10 September 2005.
Leonard, Tom. 21 September 2005. *"TV advertisers shift focus to placing products in shows" at Telegraph.co.uk. Retrieved 24 September 2005.
"Big Tobacco's Big Seduction: Women, Tobacco and the Glorification of Addiction, An interview with Mary Assunta", Multinational Monitor, May/June 2005, V.26, Nos.5&6
Nelson, J. P. "What is Learned from Longitudinal Studies of Advertising and Youth Drinking and Smoking?" International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 7(3), March 2010, pp. 870–926. Open Access: mdpi.com
External links[edit]
Examples of Tobacco Advertising
Snuff advertising in the collection of Helmetta Historical Society
UCSF Tobacco Industry Videos Collection
UCSF Tobacco Industry Audio Recordings Collection
Gallery of vintage American tobacco print advertisements
Extensive online tobacco advertising collection at Stanford University
Cigarette Cards: ABCs, at the New York Public Library Digital Gallery
Catalogue of heraldic tobacco and trading cards
Duke Tobacco Company Cigarette Cards, at the Z. Smith Reynolds Library, Wake Forest University
Laws and legislation
"Tobacco Advertising and Promotion Act 2002 (c. 36) Tobacco Advertising and Promotion Act 2002]" in the UK
"Tobacco advertising" at the British Department of Health
"RJR-MacDonald V. Canada" at Health Canada
Anti-smoking organizations
"Advertising" at SmokeHelp.org
"Fact sheet – Tobacco advertising" by the Non Smokers' Movement of Australia
Smoke Free Movies Campaign by the University of California, San Francisco
Miscellaneous
"Health and the Mass Media – Tobacco" at the School of Public Health, University of Sydney
"Tobacco advertising" at Tobacco Control Factsheets
Roswell Park Cancer Institute Tobacco Document Collections and Resources
"Tobacco and alcohol sports sponsorship" at The Globe Magazine
Collection of Anti-Smoking TV Commercials
Breathtaking Classic Cigarette Ads – slideshow by Life magazine
[show] v t e
Product advertising
[show] v t e
Smoking
[show] v t e
Cigarettes
Categories: Tobacco advertising

Graphic anti-smoking advert featuring father lighting a roll-up made of rotting flesh is unveiled as report aims to highlight lesser known consequences of the habit 
Smokers' rights group Forest calls campaign 'poisonous' and 'exaggerated'
Adverts dovetail with new report dispelling the notion roll-ups are healthier
Fewer in one in five Britons are now smokers, the lowest level in 80 years
By DAMIEN GAYLE FOR MAILONLINE
PUBLISHED: 06:48, 29 December 2014 | UPDATED: 17:21, 7 January 2015

     
177
shares
192
View comments
Smokers' advocates have railed against graphic new public health warnings showing a father lighting a hand-rolled cigarette full of rotting flesh.

Public Health England (PHE) today launches its new shock campaign alongside an expert review of the role of smoking in the progressive decline of the body's major systems.

Proclaiming loudly that 'every cigarette rots you from the inside out', the adverts will begin to appear on digital and print billboards across the country, and also on video.


+2
So rotten: Public Health England (PHE) today launches its new shock anti-smoking campaign alongside an expert review of the role of smoking in the progressive decline of the body's major systems

Enough to make you quit? Gruesome effects of smoking
Loaded: 0%Progress: 0%0:00
Play
Mute
Current Time 0:00
/
Duration Time 0:30
Fullscreen
Need Text
But smokers' rights group Forest called the campaign 'poisonous' and accused PHE of making 'exaggerated claims'.

Urging officials to 'engage directly with consumers' rather than use shock tactics, Forest chief executive Simon Clark said 'there can't be a sane adult in the United Kingdom who isn't well aware of the health risks of smoking.'

RELATED ARTICLES
Previous
1
Next

Roll-up cigarettes 'just as bad for you': Medical chief...

Prisoners get e-cigarettes in move to ban smoking in jails:...
SHARE THIS ARTICLE
Share
PHE's campaign comes as the Government's Chief Medical Officer warned the idea some people have that roll-ups are less harmful than ordinary cigarettes is wrong.

Professor Dame Sally Davies warned that both forms of smoking effectively ‘rot’ the body from the inside.

She said that contrary to popular belief that roll-ups are natural and less dangerous, the tobacco contains just as many deadly chemicals.

Health officials are concerned that roll-ups are becoming increasingly popular amongst smokers who see them as a cheaper alternative to cigarettes.

Smoking: Figures show that fewer in one in five Britons smoke, the lowest level in 80 years
+2
Smoking: Figures show that fewer in one in five Britons smoke, the lowest level in 80 years

Figures showed that 40 per cent of men and 23 per cent of women smokers use them, up from 18 per cent and 2 per cent respectively in 1990.

But 49 per cent mistakenly believe they are less harmful, according to a survey of 627 individuals.

Professor Dame Sally Davies said: ‘While many smokers know the damage cigarettes do to their hearts and lungs, they are much less likely to be aware of how harmful smoking is to the body - essentially ‘rotting’ it from the inside out, and roll-ups are no exception.

E-CIGS DO HELP SMOKERS QUIT
Smokers who use e-cigarettes are likely to stop or reduce their smoking, claims an independent review of trial data.

Almost one in 10 smokers using e-cigarettes had been able to quit the habit up to a year later, and around one-third had cut down.

The review of two trials is published today in The Cochrane Library, the world’s leading producer of systematic reviews.

Controversy continues over whether e-cigarettes have net benefits, amid fears that using them in public places will ‘re-normalise’ smoking, especially among young people, and reverse declining smoking rates. 


‘January is a time when many people make New Year’s resolutions to improve their health and try to stop smoking.

‘Millions of people have used Smokefree support (the NHS’s stop smoking programme) and we are hoping that this year, even more will take advantage of the free expertise and resources on offer.’

Figures show that fewer in one in five Britons smoke, the lowest level in 80 years.

Health officials want to bring this down even further and they are concerned that rates are much higher in deprived areas.

Forest described the campaign as ‘rotten’, ‘poisonous’ and an ‘abuse of public money’.

Mr Clark said: ‘There can't be a sane adult in the United Kingdom who isn't well aware of the health risks of smoking.

‘What's really poisonous is the way public health campaigners are constantly trying to scare and harass people with exaggerated claims and dubious statistics.

‘Campaigns like this are an abuse of public money. Education has been replaced by shrill scaremongering that is often counter-productive because it's human nature to switch off when you're being nagged or shouted at on an almost daily basis.

‘This is real life, not a Hammer Horror film.’

 

Share or comment on this article
177
shares
  by Taboola Sponsored Links 

The Upcoming Lloyds Privatisation - Don't Miss Out
Hargreaves Lansdown

20 Microwave Cheats That Will Change Your Life
Food Network

The most addictive game of the year! Play with 14 million Players now!
Forge Of Empires - Free Online Game
MOST WATCHED NEWS VIDEOS

Mother releases devastating footage of son's final moments

CCTV shows teenager throwing 'acid' over boys at train station

Grandad brought to tears at surprise dog after his last one died

Changing of the Guard bugler plays poorly out of tune

Incredible footage shows mum giving birth in hospital doors

Man confronts woman over leaving dog poo on the pavement

Moment LICE are removed from five-year-old girl's...

Moment Biggins describes bisexual people as 'the worst...
Furious mother 'squirted her boob' at a woman who told her...
'My arms just ache to hold my baby boy every day':...
Brazil ignites the samba spirit! Rio Olympics is off with a...
The $100million mansions: The world's most expensive...
Cooking, cleaning and making babies: Inside the...
‘Highly intelligent’ thug, 17, left five friends maimed like...
British girl, 17, is kidnapped and raped after getting into...
The great Olympics betrayal: With £9bn spent, we were...
Sadistic police officer, 49, who was recorded repeatedly...
'Pick up your poo!' Frustrated man confronts a dog-walker...
So how DOES Orlando Bloom measure up to the rest of the...
Girl, six, is forced to marry 55-year-old man in exchange...
MOST READ NEWS
PreviousNext
●
●
●
  Comments (190)
Share what you think
NewestOldestBest ratedWorst rated
 View all
The comments below have been moderated in advance.

Maurice Whiteman, Bolton, United Kingdom, 1 year ago

Lets go after the sugar industry with the same vigour. Millions of lives saved, millions raised in tax its a win win.

210Click to rate

mandyv, cambs, United Kingdom, 1 year ago

There are people begging for more organ donors how does this stupid stunt help with that?

610Click to rate

JENNY, chilliwack, Canada, 1 year ago

The reason they are showing this ad, is to get through to you people, who smoke. I am sorry to say this, but if you smokers want to be in denial, or have a fatalistic approach to life, then you will, have made your own bed, and will literally will have to lie in it. When you are lying in a bed in hospital, being treated for cancer, you will have plenty of time to reflect on your choice .My father had cancer of the throat, caused by smoking, and had to have his voice box, taken out, so now he has no voice. He cannot talk or sing. To all you young people, give it up, you will not stay young forever.

1220Click to rate

Brin, Plymouth, United Kingdom, 1 year ago

Adverts are supposed to be both honest and truthful, people are supposed to have freedom of choice. What's changed to allow minds to be bent in this manner?

511Click to rate

mkennedy, gateshead, United Kingdom, 1 year ago

It's a disgrace that people are not allowed to do as they please without the interference and scaremongering of politicians and alleged scientists. It's so obvious that the whole health narrative is exploited to make even more money whilst the logic is deeply flawed.

1120Click to rate

viperpilot, veghel, Netherlands, 1 year ago

" Fewer in one in five Britons are now smokers, the lowest level in 80 years" Who says so ? People that smoke won't tell any more They are the new pariah's . And given a change they buy their cigarettes on the mainland. Then you have the illegal tobacco business in the UK . Smokers are human beings : They are no different than non-smokers . But it is totally normal in the UK to set them apart This is not about smoking any more It si about the smokers . It is hate pure and simple And this add ? What are they trying to achieve This is so over the top One can only laugh and think : Watch the walking dead if you want to see gore

320Click to rate

viperpilot, veghel, Netherlands, 1 year ago

" Fewer in one in five Britons are now smokers, the lowest level in 80 years" Who says so ? People that smoke won't tell any more They are the new pariah's . And given a change they buy their cigarettes on the mainland. Then you have the illegal tobacco business in the UK . Smokers are human beings : They are no different than non-smokers . But it is totally normal in the UK to set them apart This is not about smoking any more It si about the smokers . It is hate pure and simple And this add ? What are they trying to achieve This is so over the top One can only laugh and think : Watch the walking dead if you want to see gore

34Click to rate

Cole McLister, Belfast, United Kingdom, 1 year ago

If the government really cared they'd make cigarettes illegal. Full stop. But they wont since they make enough off the revenue alone to properly fund the NHS!

419Click to rate

JENNY, chilliwack, Canada, 1 year ago

If the ad stops just one person from smoking, then it is worth it.

2714Click to rate

Brin, Plymouth, United Kingdom, 1 year ago

The end result justify the methods used? Think about Bolshevism, they use this excuse for mass murder and intimidation.

49Click to rate

pendragon25, Christchurch, United Kingdom, 1 year ago

When the government finally gets its way, who will they hound then, to make up the millions of £s that will be lost to cigarette taxes? They have to be seen as making the right moves but, in reality they can't afford for us all to give up!

515Click to rate

Nathan James Crowle, Torquay, United Kingdom, 1 year ago

I for 1 arnt complaining... it's ABOUT bloody time they updated all the old stuff.. I personally hope they continue to come out with new stuff! not get bogged down in the crap... Like that pair of lungs that has been around for-ever.. YAWN!!!!!