Researchers Medical & Health Professionals Patients & Families Parents & Educators Children & Teens
NIDA
 
Home
Drugs of Abuse
Related Topics
Publications
Funding
News & Events
About NIDA
Print
Home » Publications » Research Reports » Tobacco/Nicotine » Is Nicotine Addictive?
Tobacco/Nicotine
Is Nicotine Addictive?

Tobacco PlantsMost smokers identify tobacco use as harmful and express a desire to reduce or stop using it, and nearly 35 million want to quit each year.
Yes. Most smokers use tobacco regularly because they are addicted to nicotine. Addiction is characterized by compulsive drug seeking and abuse, even in the face of negative health consequences. It is well documented that most smokers identify tobacco use as harmful and express a desire to reduce or stop using it, and nearly 35 million of them want to quit each year. Unfortunately, more than 85 percent of those who try to quit on their own relapse, most within a week.

Research has shown how nicotine acts on the brain to produce a number of effects. Of primary importance to its addictive nature are findings that nicotine activates reward pathways—the brain circuitry that regulates feelings of pleasure. A key brain chemical involved in mediating the desire to consume drugs is the neurotransmitter dopamine, and research has shown that nicotine increases levels of dopamine in the reward circuits. This reaction is similar to that seen with other drugs of abuse and is thought to underlie the pleasurable sensations experienced by many smokers. For many tobacco users, long-term brain changes induced by continued nicotine exposure result in addiction.

Nicotine’s pharmacokinetic properties also enhance its abuse potential. Cigarette smoking produces a rapid distribution of nicotine to the brain, with drug levels peaking within 10 seconds of inhalation. However, the acute effects of nicotine dissipate quickly, as do the associated feelings of reward, which causes the smoker to continue dosing to maintain the drug’s pleasurable effects and prevent withdrawal.

Nicotine withdrawal symptoms include irritability, craving, depression, anxiety, cognitive and attention deficits, sleep disturbances, and increased appetite. These symptoms may begin within a few hours after the last cigarette, quickly driving people back to tobacco use. Symptoms peak within the first few days of smoking cessation and usually subside within a few weeks. For some people, however, symptoms may persist for months.

Although withdrawal is related to the pharmacological effects of nicotine, many behavioral factors can also affect the severity of withdrawal symptoms. For some people, the feel, smell, and sight of a cigarette and the ritual of obtaining, handling, lighting, and smoking the cigarette are all associated with the pleasurable effects of smoking and can make withdrawal or craving worse. Nicotine replacement therapies such as gum, patches, and inhalers may help alleviate the pharmacological aspects of withdrawal; however, cravings often persist. Behavioral therapies can help smokers identify environmental triggers of craving so they can employ strategies to prevent or circumvent these symptoms and urges.

PrevNext
This page was last updated July 2012

Is Nicotine Addictive?
Contents
Letter From the Director
What Are the Extent and Impact of Tobacco Use?
How Does Tobacco Deliver Its Effects?
Is Nicotine Addictive?
Are There Other Chemicals That May Contribute to Tobacco Addiction?
What Are the Medical Consequences of Tobacco Use?
Are There Safe Tobacco Products?
Tobacco Use and Comorbidity
Smoking and Pregnancy— What Are the Risks?
Smoking and Adolescence
Are There Gender Differences in Tobacco Smoking?
Are There Effective Treatments for Tobacco Addiction?
New Frontiers in Tobacco Research
Glossary
References
Where Can I Get Further Information About Tobacco/Nicotine?
Ordering Publications

Call 1-877-643-2644 or:
NIDA Drug Pubs

Español
PDF (1MB)
ePub (368KB)
Kindle (656KB)
Online Only
Smoking Quitline
For help from the National Cancer Institute: 1-877-44U-QUIT (1-877-448-7848)

The National Cancer Institute's trained counselors are available to provide information and help with quitting in English or Spanish, Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Eastern Time.

Learn more


Featured Publications

Principles of Substance Abuse Prevention for Early Chil...
Science of Addiction Cover
Drugs, Brains, and Behavior: The Science of Addiction
Publication cover for Marijuana: Facts Parents Need to Know
Marijuana: Facts Parents Need to Know
Marijuana: Facts for Teens Publication Cover
Marijuana: Facts for Teens
More
NIDA Notes: The Latest in Drug Abuse Research
​Research Reports
This series of reports simplifies the science of research findings for the educated lay public, legislators, educational groups, and practitioners. The series reports on research findings of national interest.