Graphic anti-smoking advert featuring father lighting a roll-up made of rotting flesh is unveiled as report aims to highlight lesser known consequences of the habit 
Smokers' rights group Forest calls campaign 'poisonous' and 'exaggerated'
Adverts dovetail with new report dispelling the notion roll-ups are healthier
Fewer in one in five Britons are now smokers, the lowest level in 80 years
By DAMIEN GAYLE FOR MAILONLINE
PUBLISHED: 06:48, 29 December 2014 | UPDATED: 17:21, 7 January 2015

     
177
shares
192
View comments
Smokers' advocates have railed against graphic new public health warnings showing a father lighting a hand-rolled cigarette full of rotting flesh.

Public Health England (PHE) today launches its new shock campaign alongside an expert review of the role of smoking in the progressive decline of the body's major systems.

Proclaiming loudly that 'every cigarette rots you from the inside out', the adverts will begin to appear on digital and print billboards across the country, and also on video.


+2
So rotten: Public Health England (PHE) today launches its new shock anti-smoking campaign alongside an expert review of the role of smoking in the progressive decline of the body's major systems

Enough to make you quit? Gruesome effects of smoking
Loaded: 0%Progress: 0%0:00
Play
Mute
Current Time 0:00
/
Duration Time 0:30
Fullscreen
Need Text
But smokers' rights group Forest called the campaign 'poisonous' and accused PHE of making 'exaggerated claims'.

Urging officials to 'engage directly with consumers' rather than use shock tactics, Forest chief executive Simon Clark said 'there can't be a sane adult in the United Kingdom who isn't well aware of the health risks of smoking.'

RELATED ARTICLES
Previous
1
Next

Roll-up cigarettes 'just as bad for you': Medical chief...

Prisoners get e-cigarettes in move to ban smoking in jails:...
SHARE THIS ARTICLE
Share
PHE's campaign comes as the Government's Chief Medical Officer warned the idea some people have that roll-ups are less harmful than ordinary cigarettes is wrong.

Professor Dame Sally Davies warned that both forms of smoking effectively ‘rot’ the body from the inside.

She said that contrary to popular belief that roll-ups are natural and less dangerous, the tobacco contains just as many deadly chemicals.

Health officials are concerned that roll-ups are becoming increasingly popular amongst smokers who see them as a cheaper alternative to cigarettes.

Smoking: Figures show that fewer in one in five Britons smoke, the lowest level in 80 years
+2
Smoking: Figures show that fewer in one in five Britons smoke, the lowest level in 80 years

Figures showed that 40 per cent of men and 23 per cent of women smokers use them, up from 18 per cent and 2 per cent respectively in 1990.

But 49 per cent mistakenly believe they are less harmful, according to a survey of 627 individuals.

Professor Dame Sally Davies said: ‘While many smokers know the damage cigarettes do to their hearts and lungs, they are much less likely to be aware of how harmful smoking is to the body - essentially ‘rotting’ it from the inside out, and roll-ups are no exception.

E-CIGS DO HELP SMOKERS QUIT
Smokers who use e-cigarettes are likely to stop or reduce their smoking, claims an independent review of trial data.

Almost one in 10 smokers using e-cigarettes had been able to quit the habit up to a year later, and around one-third had cut down.

The review of two trials is published today in The Cochrane Library, the world’s leading producer of systematic reviews.

Controversy continues over whether e-cigarettes have net benefits, amid fears that using them in public places will ‘re-normalise’ smoking, especially among young people, and reverse declining smoking rates. 


‘January is a time when many people make New Year’s resolutions to improve their health and try to stop smoking.

‘Millions of people have used Smokefree support (the NHS’s stop smoking programme) and we are hoping that this year, even more will take advantage of the free expertise and resources on offer.’

Figures show that fewer in one in five Britons smoke, the lowest level in 80 years.

Health officials want to bring this down even further and they are concerned that rates are much higher in deprived areas.

Forest described the campaign as ‘rotten’, ‘poisonous’ and an ‘abuse of public money’.

Mr Clark said: ‘There can't be a sane adult in the United Kingdom who isn't well aware of the health risks of smoking.

‘What's really poisonous is the way public health campaigners are constantly trying to scare and harass people with exaggerated claims and dubious statistics.

‘Campaigns like this are an abuse of public money. Education has been replaced by shrill scaremongering that is often counter-productive because it's human nature to switch off when you're being nagged or shouted at on an almost daily basis.

‘This is real life, not a Hammer Horror film.’

 

Share or comment on this article
177
shares
  by Taboola Sponsored Links 

The Upcoming Lloyds Privatisation - Don't Miss Out
Hargreaves Lansdown

20 Microwave Cheats That Will Change Your Life
Food Network

The most addictive game of the year! Play with 14 million Players now!
Forge Of Empires - Free Online Game
MOST WATCHED NEWS VIDEOS

Mother releases devastating footage of son's final moments

CCTV shows teenager throwing 'acid' over boys at train station

Grandad brought to tears at surprise dog after his last one died

Changing of the Guard bugler plays poorly out of tune

Incredible footage shows mum giving birth in hospital doors

Man confronts woman over leaving dog poo on the pavement

Moment LICE are removed from five-year-old girl's...

Moment Biggins describes bisexual people as 'the worst...
Furious mother 'squirted her boob' at a woman who told her...
'My arms just ache to hold my baby boy every day':...
Brazil ignites the samba spirit! Rio Olympics is off with a...
The $100million mansions: The world's most expensive...
Cooking, cleaning and making babies: Inside the...
‘Highly intelligent’ thug, 17, left five friends maimed like...
British girl, 17, is kidnapped and raped after getting into...
The great Olympics betrayal: With £9bn spent, we were...
Sadistic police officer, 49, who was recorded repeatedly...
'Pick up your poo!' Frustrated man confronts a dog-walker...
So how DOES Orlando Bloom measure up to the rest of the...
Girl, six, is forced to marry 55-year-old man in exchange...
MOST READ NEWS
PreviousNext
●
●
●
  Comments (190)
Share what you think
NewestOldestBest ratedWorst rated
 View all
The comments below have been moderated in advance.

Maurice Whiteman, Bolton, United Kingdom, 1 year ago

Lets go after the sugar industry with the same vigour. Millions of lives saved, millions raised in tax its a win win.

210Click to rate

mandyv, cambs, United Kingdom, 1 year ago

There are people begging for more organ donors how does this stupid stunt help with that?

610Click to rate

JENNY, chilliwack, Canada, 1 year ago

The reason they are showing this ad, is to get through to you people, who smoke. I am sorry to say this, but if you smokers want to be in denial, or have a fatalistic approach to life, then you will, have made your own bed, and will literally will have to lie in it. When you are lying in a bed in hospital, being treated for cancer, you will have plenty of time to reflect on your choice .My father had cancer of the throat, caused by smoking, and had to have his voice box, taken out, so now he has no voice. He cannot talk or sing. To all you young people, give it up, you will not stay young forever.

1220Click to rate

Brin, Plymouth, United Kingdom, 1 year ago

Adverts are supposed to be both honest and truthful, people are supposed to have freedom of choice. What's changed to allow minds to be bent in this manner?

511Click to rate

mkennedy, gateshead, United Kingdom, 1 year ago

It's a disgrace that people are not allowed to do as they please without the interference and scaremongering of politicians and alleged scientists. It's so obvious that the whole health narrative is exploited to make even more money whilst the logic is deeply flawed.

1120Click to rate

viperpilot, veghel, Netherlands, 1 year ago

" Fewer in one in five Britons are now smokers, the lowest level in 80 years" Who says so ? People that smoke won't tell any more They are the new pariah's . And given a change they buy their cigarettes on the mainland. Then you have the illegal tobacco business in the UK . Smokers are human beings : They are no different than non-smokers . But it is totally normal in the UK to set them apart This is not about smoking any more It si about the smokers . It is hate pure and simple And this add ? What are they trying to achieve This is so over the top One can only laugh and think : Watch the walking dead if you want to see gore

320Click to rate

viperpilot, veghel, Netherlands, 1 year ago

" Fewer in one in five Britons are now smokers, the lowest level in 80 years" Who says so ? People that smoke won't tell any more They are the new pariah's . And given a change they buy their cigarettes on the mainland. Then you have the illegal tobacco business in the UK . Smokers are human beings : They are no different than non-smokers . But it is totally normal in the UK to set them apart This is not about smoking any more It si about the smokers . It is hate pure and simple And this add ? What are they trying to achieve This is so over the top One can only laugh and think : Watch the walking dead if you want to see gore

34Click to rate

Cole McLister, Belfast, United Kingdom, 1 year ago

If the government really cared they'd make cigarettes illegal. Full stop. But they wont since they make enough off the revenue alone to properly fund the NHS!

419Click to rate

JENNY, chilliwack, Canada, 1 year ago

If the ad stops just one person from smoking, then it is worth it.

2714Click to rate

Brin, Plymouth, United Kingdom, 1 year ago

The end result justify the methods used? Think about Bolshevism, they use this excuse for mass murder and intimidation.

49Click to rate

pendragon25, Christchurch, United Kingdom, 1 year ago

When the government finally gets its way, who will they hound then, to make up the millions of £s that will be lost to cigarette taxes? They have to be seen as making the right moves but, in reality they can't afford for us all to give up!

515Click to rate

Nathan James Crowle, Torquay, United Kingdom, 1 year ago

I for 1 arnt complaining... it's ABOUT bloody time they updated all the old stuff.. I personally hope they continue to come out with new stuff! not get bogged down in the crap... Like that pair of lungs that has been around for-ever.. YAWN!!!!!