HOME EFFECTS OF SHISHA  QUIT SHISHA QUITTING TOOLS BLOG

Search
slide
Protect your health and stay clear of Hookah!
123
The Quit Shisha Guide – eBook
40 Days to Quitting Shisha / Hookah
Our informative eBook is here to help you quit shisha, by highlighting all the health issues, along with guiding you on a 40 day plan.


Quitting Tools
The Smoke free Web site includes a variety of interactive tools to help you quit smoking.
Get more free resources 
For cutting-edge, evidence-based tools designed...


Home > The Effects of Smoking Shisha
The Effects of Smoking Shisha
Shisha is the flavoured tobacco used in smoking process using hookah water pipes, which are also called by other names such as Narghile, Hubble Bubble, Goza, among other names. The process of smoking Shisha started when tobacco is soaked on fruits shavings such as apple, grapes and strawberries.

A hookah consists of a base, pipe, bowl and hose or a mouthpiece. Tobacco is placed in the bowl, which is at the top of the pipe structure. An aluminium foil covers the bowl and small charcoal pieces are then placed on the foil, which is punctured using a pin to gently heat the tobacco. When smoked using the hose; smooth, sweet-smelling vapour is filtered through the base containing water. It also comes in floral flavours such as coconut, vanilla and rose.

Main Effects of Shisha
ACauses cancer
Due to the mode of Shisha smoking—including frequency of puffing, depth of inhalation, and length of the smoking session—Shisha smokers may absorb higher concentrations of the toxins found in cigarette smoke, thus increasing the hazard to the body.

The charcoal used to heat tobacco in the Shisha pipes increases the health risks. Even after it has passed through water, the smoke produced by a Shisha contains high levels of toxic compounds, including carbon monoxide, heavy metals, and cancer-causing chemicals. Shisha tobacco and smoke contain numerous toxic substances known to cause lung, bladder, and oral cancers. A typical one-hour session of hookah smoking exposes the user to 100 to 200 times the volume of smoke inhaled from a single cigarette.

Irritation from exposure to tobacco juices increases the risk of developing oral cancers. The irritation by tobacco juice products is likely to be greater among Shisha smokersthan among pipe or cigar smokers because Shisha smoking is typically practiced (with or without inhalation) more often and for longer periods of time.

BCauses heart problem
Shisha tobacco and smoke contain numerous toxic substances known to cause clogged arteries and heart disease.

CPeriodontal (gum tissue) disease
There is an increased level of nicotine and cotinine (a by product of nicotine) in the blood plasma, saliva and urine of Shisha smokers that affects the periodontal tissues.

DProne to infections
Hookah pipes used in hookah bars and cafes may not be cleaned properly, risking the spread of infectious diseases. Infectious diseases including tuberculosis (which can infect the lungs or other parts of the body), aspergillus (a fungus that can cause serious lung infections), and helicobacter (which can cause stomach ulcers) may be spread by sharing the pipe or through the way the tobacco is prepared.

Hookah pipes used in hookah bars and cafes may not be cleaned properly, risking the spread of infectious diseases.

ELow birth weight babies with pregnant women smoking Shisha
Shisha smoking among pregnant mothers is risky to the baby as well, since the child may face underweight problems and difficulty in breathing. Babies born to women who smoked one or more water pipes a day during pregnancy have lower birth weights (were at least 3½ ounces less) than babies born to non-smokers and are at an increased risk for respiratory diseases.

FDanger of second hand smoke
Using Shisha smoke poses a serious potential health hazard to smokers and others exposed to the smoke emitted. The second hand smoke from Shisha poses a serious risk for non-smokers, particularly because it contains smoke not only from the tobacco but also from the heat source (e.g., charcoal) used in the hookah.

GNicotine addiction
Hookah and Shisha smoking deliver almost the same amount of nicotine as cigarettes do, leading to nicotine addiction.

HSome effects of Shisha also includes: wrinkled skin, sexual impotence, etc.
Shisha smokers who regard shisha as another form of smoking with a lower risk should reconsider their thoughts. The use of smoking Shisha as a past time hobby, a bonding session or a social event for some is entirely our choice. That temporary bliss given by smoking Shisha for a long run is not to be ignored though. The listed effects of smoking Shisha above are just some of the effects and we do not know what more could it cause. The sure thing is, the moment you are having a Shisha session you are also buying yourself a ticket in slowly killing your body bits by bits.

The prevalence of people smoking Shisha as a way of life is a call for attention. It is maybe because you want to get out from the stress of a problem that needs a solution. By way of this information people can make decisions to save or if they choose to ruin their body. If smoking cigarettes is harmful, then hookah smoking is only worse.

 3420 140 43 69Share30

Newsletter


Your name
 
Your E-mail
 Sign Up
Featured Post

How to Quit Smoking Shisha Completely by Preparing for a Relapse
Shisha Facts: How Shisha Affects Men Fertility and Women Pregnancy
Top Posts

E-Shisha vs Traditional Shisha
The e-hookah 101: A guide to electronic hookah
Support Quit Shisha Cause
Why Smoking Shisha is worse than Smoking Cigarettes
Government Clampdown Needed on Sale of Shisha Tobacco
Categories

Cancer
Hepatitis by Shisha
Herpes by Shisha
Quit Shisha
Quit Shisha Blog
Social Effects of Shisha
Tuberculosis by Shisha
Uncategorized
Effects of Shisha
Cancer
Hepatitis
Herpres
Tuberculosis
Shisha Addiction
Social Effects of Shisha
Popular Pages
Building Awareness about Effects of Hookah
The Effects of Smoking Shisha
Myth and Facts about Shisha
Shisha Addiction