February 2015
Consultation on the
introduction of regulations for
standardised packaging of
tobacco products
Summary report
2
Title: Consultation on the introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco
products: Summary report
Author: Tobacco Programme, Public & International Health Directorate
Document Purpose:
Consultation
Publication date:
February 2015
Target audience:
General public
Contact details:
Department of Health
Tobacco Programme
6th Floor Wellington House
133 – 155 Waterloo Road
London
SE1 8UG
You may re-use the text of this document (not including logos) free of charge in any format
or medium, under the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/
© Crown copyright
Published to gov.uk, in PDF format only.
www.gov.uk/dh
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
3
Consultation on Introducing
Regulations for
Standardised Packaging of
Tobacco Products:
Summary Report
Prepared by
Department of Health Tobacco Programme
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
4
Contents
1. Executive summary .............................................................................................................6
2. Overview of the consultation .............................................................................................7
Purpose of consultation.............................................................................................................7
Responses Received...................................................................................................................7
Limitations to elicit representative samples of public opinion.................................................8
3. Overview of responses........................................................................................................9
Respondent Demographics .......................................................................................................9
4. Responses to the consultation .........................................................................................12
Question 1................................................................................................................................12
Chantler Report Process and Findings................................................................................ 12
Evidence from Australia....................................................................................................... 13
Question 2................................................................................................................................15
Unintended Consequences ................................................................................................. 15
Legal Considerations ........................................................................................................... 16
Public Support..................................................................................................................... 17
Policy Process ...................................................................................................................... 17
Alternative Measures ........................................................................................................... 18
Question 3................................................................................................................................19
No comment ....................................................................................................................... 19
Comments ........................................................................................................................... 19
Regulation amendment suggestions .................................................................................. 20
Implementation and Timetable........................................................................................... 21
Enforcement ........................................................................................................................ 21
Question 4................................................................................................................................22
Benefits ................................................................................................................................ 22
Costs .................................................................................................................................... 22
Impact on retailers .............................................................................................................. 23
Export Shops ....................................................................................................................... 24
Packaging and design companies ...................................................................................... 24
General ................................................................................................................................ 24
Recommendations............................................................................................................... 25
5. Campaigns ........................................................................................................................26
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
5
Appendix A.......................................................................................................................... 35
List of Organisations and Businesses that responded to the consultation ....................... 35
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
6
1. Executive summary
1.1. This consultation was to inform decision-making by the Department of Health and Devolved
Administrations on whether to introduce standardised packaging of tobacco products. We
wanted to hear the views of interested people, businesses and organisations. We were
particularly seeking new, or additional, information relevant to standardised packaging that
has arisen since the 2012 consultation.
1.2. The Children and Families Act 2014 provides the Secretary of State with powers to regulate
the retail packaging of tobacco products. The primary purpose of standardised packaging is
to promote public health. Although public health is a devolved matter, the Children and
Families Act 2014 provides the power for the Secretary of State to make regulations for the
whole of the UK with the consent of ministers in Scotland, Northern Ireland and Wales,
where those regulations have provisions that are within the competence of their devolved
Parliament or Assembly.
1.3. To provide maximum clarity, the consultation included draft regulations which set out the
proposed requirements for standardised packaging.
1.4. This report has been prepared and published by the Department of Health to provide an
overview of the responses received and a summary of the main themes that emerged in
response to the specific questions asked in the consultation document.
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
7
2. Overview of the consultation
Purpose of consultation
2.1. The Department of Health and Devolved Administrations jointly ran a public
consultation between 26 June and 7 August 2014, inviting views on a set of draft
regulations for the introduction of standardised packaging of certain tobacco
products. The consultation asked four questions about; 1) the Chantler review, 2)
whether any new evidence is available, 3) draft regulations and 4) the consultationstage
impact assessment. The purpose of this consultation was to inform final
decision making by the Department of Health and Devolved Administrations.
2.2. In 2012, the Department of Health and Devolved Administrations consulted on a
policy proposal that would require the packaging of tobacco products to be
standardised, with the aim of improving public health by reducing the use of tobacco.
A summary report of the 2012 consultation was published in July 2013 and can be
found at: https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/standardised-packaging-oftobacco-products
2.3. This second consultation asked, in particular, for new or additional information
relevant to standardised packaging that has arisen since the 2012 consultation. The
consultation document, which sets out the policy background and objectives in full,
can be found at: https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/standardisedpackaging-of-tobacco-products-draft-regulations
2.4. This report has been prepared and published by the Department of Health to provide
an overview of the responses received and to summarise the points made during the
consultation. Issues raised have been organised according to theme, under each
consultation question as appropriate.
2.5. The Department of Health engaged TONIC consultants Ltd to assist with the
collating and undertaking initial analysis of consultation responses. The Department
of Health and Devolved Administrations undertook further analysis and full
consideration of the issues raised.
2.6. Given the number and breadth of consultation responses, this report cannot include
every single individual comment received. The report does, however, provide an
overview of the responses received and reflects the main themes that emerged in
response to the questions asked in the consultation document.
Responses Received
2.7. A total of 137,711 responses were received, made up of 1,307 detailed responses
(from businesses, organisations, the public and health and social care professionals)
and 136,404 campaign responses (i.e multiple copies of the same response
endorsed by individuals).
2.8. As with previous consultations on this issue, respondents fell into two distinct groups:
• Those who supported the introduction of standardised packaging of
tobacco products – consisting predominantly of health charities, nongovernmental
organisations, local authorities and their public health and 
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
8
trading standards departments, NHS bodies, and health and social care
professionals.
• Those who opposed the policy – largely made up of businesses involved in
the tobacco industry, retail, design, packaging, intellectual
property/trademarks and their relevant trade associations.
Limitations to elicit representative samples of public opinion
2.9. The consultation process was not intended or designed to elicit representative
samples of public opinion, instead it sought information, comments and views on the
consultation questions, draft regulations, impact assessment and equality analysis.
2.10. It is in the nature of open consultation exercises that, generally, it is only those who
already have an interest in the subject to respond to the questions. The nature of
consultation exercises means that respondents are self-selecting, and cannot
therefore be considered to be a representative sample of public opinion.
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
9
3. Overview of responses
3.1. This chapter provides an overview of the responses received to this consultation.
Respondent Demographics
3.2. Consultation responses came from the following groups:
• 392 members of the public
• 37 health or social care professionals
• 624 businesses or sole traders
• 254 organisations
3.3. The following tables show further demographics relating to respondents to the
consultation. The majority of responses related to the UK as a whole.
Country response relates to Number %
UK 1,224 94%
England 69 5%
Scotland 10 0.8%
Wales 3 0.2%
Northern Ireland 1 0.1%
Total 1,307
Note: Where no specific answer had been given to this question in a response, the
assumption was that this related to the entire UK and has been recorded as such in the
table above.
3.4. The majority (55%) of responses came from people, businesses or organisations
with no declared links to the tobacco industry. Around a third of respondents,
however, declared their links to the tobacco industry, and 15% did not give an
answer to this question.
Tobacco Links Number %
Yes 399 31%
No 718 55%
No answer 190 15%
Total 1,307
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
10
3.5. The majority of responses from businesses came from tobacco retailers (89%).
Type of Business Number % of businesses
that responded
Tobacco retailer (supermarket) 1 0.2%
Tobacco retailer (convenience store) 533 85.4%
Tobacco retailer (other type of shop or business) 20 3.2%
Specialist tobacconist 1 0.2%
Duty-free shop 2 0.3%
Wholesale tobacco seller 14 2.2%
Tobacco manufacturer 12 1.9%
Retailer not selling tobacco products 0 0.0%
Pharmaceutical industry 0 0.0%
Business involved in the design or manufacture of
packaging 21 3.4%
Other 20 3.2%
Total 624
3.6. Responses from organisations came mainly from local authorities (30%), health
charities or NGOs operating at a national level (14%), and local tobacco control
alliances (12%).
Type of Organisation Number % of organisations
that responded
NHS organisation 10 3.9%
Health charity/NGO (working at national level) 35 13.8%
Local Authority 67 26.4%
Local Authority Trading Standards or Regulatory
Services Department 10 3.9%
Local tobacco control alliance 30 11.8%
Retail representative organisation 14 5.5%
Industry representative organisation 16 6.3%
Other type of business representative organisation 0 0.0%
University or research organisation 6 2.4%
Other 66 26.0%
Total 254
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
11
3.7. Campaign responses came from the following:
Organising Group Format Campaign Name Number
received
British American Tobacco
Pension Company Standard Letter & Email British American
Tobacco Pensioners 824
FOREST Standard email, standard
letter, & signed petition Hands off our packs 123,269
Imperial Tobacco
Invitation to participate in
campaign letter signed by
participants
Imperial Tobacco
letter to pensioners 7
UNITE Campaign Postcard UK Jobs At Risk 2,290
Tobacco Retailers
Alliance Campaign Postcard No to Plain Packs 10,001
Local Campaign 1
(with no clear organising
group)
Standard Letter No name given to
campaign 5
Local Campaign 2
(with no clear organising
group)
Standard Letter No name given to
campaign 4
Local Campaign 3
(with no clear organising
group)
Standard Letter No name given to
campaign 4
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
12
4.2. Responses to this question discussed both the Chantler report and emerging
evidence from Australia.
Chantler Report Process and Findings
4.3. The discussion around the Chantler report was polarised, with comments received
relating to both the methods and findings of the evidence.
4.4. Health NGOs, local authorities, public health departments and health and social care
professionals generally welcomed the findings and endorsed the methods and
evidence used in the Review. It was stated that the Review provides a full and
accurate description of the available evidence concerning packaging. The conclusion
of such responses was that the case has now been made for action and that
standardised packaging should therefore be implemented.
4.5. Some respondents provided further supporting evidence to assert that the
introduction of standardised packaging would be effective. For example, many
responses referred to the report by Professor David Hammond for the Irish
Department of Health which they believed supports the Chantler Review’s
conclusions. Public Health England also conducted a search of published peer
reviewed literature from 2012 onwards to inform their response, concluding that
tobacco branding is a powerful marketing tool and that standardised packaging is
less appealing to young people. Other new evidence included research conducted
on behalf of the Irish Heart Foundation and the Irish Cancer society, which
concluded that tobacco in standard packaging was less appealing to teenagers, and
has strong potential to influence smoking choices and behaviours among young
people.
4.6. Others, including respondents from the tobacco industry, took a different view,
stating that the Chantler Review does not provide a sufficient evidential basis upon
which to introduce legislation. They argue that the report relies on unsound and
hypothetical evidence and incorrectly concludes that branded packaging contributes
to increased tobacco consumption. Some also argued that the Chantler Review was
4. Responses to the consultation
4.1. People were invited to respond to four consultation questions in the consultation
document. This chapter summarises the key themes that emerged from each of
these questions.
Question 1
Do you have any observations about the report of the Chantler Review that
you wish to bring to our attention?
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
13
not independent, relying on expert opinions from tobacco-control advocates or those
with conflicts of interest and dismissing evidence which does not support the policy.
4.7. The responses from the tobacco industry also felt that the Chantler report relied too
heavily on the Sterling Review, and believed that full account had not been taken of
the data available from Australia. Some responses referred to studies which the
Chantler report had not considered in full, such as the KPMG report on the illicit
tobacco market in Australia. They also pointed to a report from London Economics
for Philip Morris International, which concludes that the data from Australia does not
demonstrate a change in smoking prevalence following the introduction of plain
packaging.
4.8. Such respondents also stated that the Chantler report failed to address issues wider
than public health sufficiently, though acknowledged that these were largely outside
of the terms of reference of the review.
Evidence from Australia
4.9. Many respondents set out the evidence that they felt showed that the introduction of
standardised packaging in Australia has either been successful or unsuccessful. A
number then also sought to discredit the opposing view and the evidence supporting
that view.
4.10. One of the issues raised was the impact on smoking prevalence. Some referenced
statistics published by the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, which they say
showed that prevalence of daily smoking fell between 2010 and 2013. They pointed
out that the survey was conducted before the tax rises that occurred in December
2013, and suggested that standardised packaging was the only major tobacco
control policy introduced during that period.
4.11. There were some more specific comments about young people in Australia which
referred to that same survey showing that fewer young people were taking up
smoking. In addition, they pointed to Australian Government statistics which they
said indicated that there had been a decrease in the first quarter of 2014 in tobacco
sales per person, with consumption of tobacco at the lowest level that it had ever
been.
4.12. Some respondents also attributed the introduction of standardised packaging to the
increased number of calls to Quitline in New South Wales, and a study which
showed that the number of cigarette packets displayed in public and outdoor areas
had significantly reduced, in part because of a fall in the number of consumers and in
part due to smokers being less willing to display their packs in public.
4.13. Others, however, felt evidence from Australia was unfavourable or showed no
increased impact on decline of tobacco consumption levels. British American
Tobacco provided a report which gave analysis of data which they said shows
increases in smoking prevalence, indicators that standardised packaging had made it
harder to quit smoking, and other findings following the introduction of standardised
packaging.
4.14. Other respondents said that the data recently published by the Australian
Government confirms that smoking prevalence has not fallen in line with the preexisting
trend since the introduction of the policy, and that consumption levels had
not decreased, with some claiming that it had increased. Some responses said that 
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
14
national rates for youth smoking had actually increased between 2010 and 2013.
They also pointed to industry sales data that demonstrates that there had been
increased sales of factory made cigarettes and some claimed that the low price
cigarette segment had grown.
4.15. Some respondents questioned the validity of the current evidence base in Australia.
Some felt there is a need for more robust evidence, as some of the studies cited are
still limited in their scope. Criticisms of existing data and research in Australia were
that confounding variables made it nearly impossible to make claims of cause and
effect, with many stating that it is difficult to decipher the actual impact standardised
packaging has had on smoking uptake or quitting when the policy was implemented
alongside other policies and is still in its infancy.
4.16. Some respondents noted that the Australian Government review of the impact of the
policy would occur in December 2014 and felt that there should be a full evaluation of
both Australian data and the impact of the display ban (from 2015) before regulations
are brought into force in the United Kingdom.
4.17. Some respondents who supported standardised packaging expressed concern over
what they perceived to be tobacco industry’s attempts to refute the success of
standardised packaging. They claimed that industry reports of an increase in sales of
tobacco since the introduction of standardised packaging had not considered this in
relation to increases in the Australian population. They suggest that when adjusting
for this, tobacco sales per person have fallen. Some also pointed towards prestocking
of tobacco prior to a tax increase in December 2013 as a potential
explanation for any apparent increase in sales.
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
15
4.18. Respondents used this question to discuss all of the wider aspects of the proposed
policy, including possible unintended consequences, legal considerations and
comments on the policy process.
Unintended Consequences
4.19. Some respondents who were against the introduction of standardised packaging,
said that the removal of trade marks may encourage price competition or
commoditisation, which could potentially lead to an increase in consumption,
particularly in young people. Some believed that a possible increase in down trading
from more expensive brands of tobacco to cheaper brands (as a result of the loss of
branding) would lead to a loss in revenue for retailers and the Exchequer. Some
respondents claimed that this had occurred in Australia, with the market share for
cheaper cigarettes rising since the introduction of standardised packaging.
4.20. Some respondents from the tobacco industry indicated that standardised packaging
may inhibit the tobacco industry from being able to fairly compete and differentiate
their products, which they argue would also create barriers to entry to the tobacco
market for new businesses, products and innovation.
4.21. One of the main themes to emerge related to illicit trade. Respondents provided
views on the impact of plain packaging on the illicit market in Australia and also in
relation to the potential impact in the UK.
4.22. Some respondents, including tobacco manufacturers and retailers, were concerned
that standardised packaging could increase the supply of, or demand for, illicit
tobacco. They argued that the illicit market in Australia had increased significantly
since the introduction of standardised packaging, pointing to evidence such as the
KPMG full year report, which suggested that illicit trade in Australia has increased as
a percentage of total consumption. Others referred to a newspaper article claiming
that a major cigarette counterfeiter saw standardised packaging as a potential boost
for illicit trade, and a survey which indicated that police officers were concerned that
standardised packaging may accelerate the black market. Some respondents said
that standardised packs would be less complicated to counterfeit. Some also referred
to an increase in confiscation of illicit cigarettes by Customs and Border Protection
Services in Australia between 2012 and 2013, in comparison to between 2010 and
2011.
4.23. The fears around any potential increase in illicit trade centred on the possible harm
to human health (as a result of unregulated ingredients), a loss of customers for
legitimate retailers and a decrease in the quality of the products. Some respondents
Question 2
Do you have any information, in particular any new or additional
information since the 2012 consultation, relating to the wider aspects of
standardised packaging, that you wish to bring to our attention?
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
16
also mentioned the potential loss of tax revenue that may accompany any rise in
illicit trade.
4.24. The concerns around illicit trade were countered by some respondents, who felt they
were unfounded, and had been addressed in the Chantler Review which concluded
that there was a lack of evidence to support such concerns. Some responses also
stated that the Australian Government and their customs officials had disputed the
claims, suggesting that industry-funded research had over-estimated the level of illicit
trade in Australia. Some respondents cited views from a HMRC official giving
evidence at a Home Affairs Select Committee saying that standardised packaging
was unlikely to have a material effect on counterfeiting and illicit trade was also
referred to.
4.25. Some respondents said that illicit tobacco would be easier to identify if packs were
standardised, and pointed to the fact that key security features on existing packs
would be upheld on standardised packaging and new systems such as “codentify”,
as developed by Philip Morris International, would help to combat illicit trade. They
stated that these measures would be further strengthened by additional markings
required under the EU Tobacco Products Directive, including unique identifiers,
coded numbering and covert anti-counterfeit marks. It was argued therefore that
there was a lack of plausible mechanism by which standardised packaging would
cause a direct increase in illicit tobacco.
4.26. Many respondents mentioned that more enforcement was still needed as the illicit
market in tobacco products remains too large.
Legal Considerations
4.27. Some respondents to the consultation raised potential legal issues in relation to the
policy. These were varied, with some respondents from the tobacco industry stating
that they believe the proposal to be illegal. Some respondents indicated that they
would be prepared to take legal action against the regulations in court if required.
Some also referred to responses to the 2012 consultation on legal issues and argued
that the draft regulations did not take these fully into account.
The overarching themes are listed below;
4.28. FCTC: Some stated that the World Health Organisation’s (WHO) Framework
Convention on Tobacco Control (FCTC) does not mandate standardised packaging.
4.29. EU Tobacco Products Directive (TPD): Some respondents believe that the
Government should wait until after the revised EU Tobacco Products Directive
disputes have been resolved before proceeding with the policy. Responses pointed
in particular to Article 24(2) of the TPD, which is relevant to standardised packaging,
and to the principle of free movement of goods between member states, which would
be affected by standardised packaging. Some respondents felt that the policy could
constitute a “clear barrier to trade”.
4.30. Intellectual Property and Trade Marks: One of the main legal issues raised related to
intellectual property and trade marks. Some respondents believed that the policy
would constitute a deprivation of their property rights and a huge loss to brand
owners. Some respondents believed that standardised packaging would contravene
various international and UK laws which provides for the protection of intellectual
property. These include; the WTO Agreement on Trade-related Aspects of 
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
17
Intellectual Property (TRIPS), Article 17 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the
European Union, the WTO’s Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT), the
Human Rights Act 1988 and Section 22 of the UK Trade Mark Act 1994 and Bilateral
Trade Agreements. Some respondents described the high value of trade marks and
brands to the tobacco industry and claimed that large amounts of compensation to
companies could be awarded if such laws were found to have been broken.
4.31. Australian litigation: Some respondents mentioned current legal challenges to
Australia’s Tobacco Plain Packaging Act, claiming that it infringes various
international treaty obligations. Such responses suggested waiting until the outcome
of the World Trade Organisation (WTO) dispute resolution proceedings.
4.32. Many supporters of standardised packaging believed that the challenges mounted
against Australia were from countries supported by the tobacco industry, as the WTO
rules do not permit private businesses and organisations to challenge. They
encouraged the UK Government to take confidence from the situation in Australia
and pointed to several other countries which are at various stages of consideration of
the policy, including Ireland, New Zealand and France.
4.33. Some respondents stated that although the tobacco industry have argued that
standardised packaging would be an infringement of their intellectual property, this
argument has been tested in and dismissed by the Australian High Court. They also
argued that standardised packaging constitutes a restriction of the use of a
trademark rather than its appropriation and that international trade agreements state
that they should not be interpreted in a way which prevents implementation of public
health measures. They also pointed out that the draft regulations still allow for
trademark registration and also use in the wholesale trade.
4.34. Some respondents held the view that an introduction of standardised packaging for
tobacco products could set a legal precedent for other sectors, such as food and
beverages.
Public Support
4.35. Some respondents stated that there was wide public support for the introduction of
standardised packaging, quoting from a number of surveys, polls and research. This
included a poll by YouGov for ASH (Action on Smoking and Health) which found that
64% of adults in Great Britain were in favour of standardised packaging, with only
10% opposed to it. Others quoted similar surveys from their region and some
referred to the fact that Section 94 of the Children and Families Act 2014 was passed
overwhelmingly in Parliament. Some, however, felt that public support was generally
against the measures, with some responses referring to the 2012 consultation
campaign responses and stating that almost two thirds of the respondents to that
consultation were opposed to standardised packaging.
Policy Process
4.36. Some respondents commented on the policy process. These included comments on
the perceived proportionality of the proposed policy. Local authorities, public health
and trading standards departments outlined the need for urgent action to reduce the
prevalence and uptake of smoking. Respondents referred to mortality rates from
tobacco-related illnesses, the negative health effects and the cost to society of
smoking. Many local authorities emphasised the scale of smoking uptake by young 
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
18
people as well as wider tobacco related health problems in their area. Such
respondents sometimes stressed the need for legislation to be passed soon.
4.37. Some respondents who did not support standardised packaging referred to existing
restrictions on the sale and packaging of tobacco products in the UK, suggesting that
any further restriction would be unwarranted. Some respondents specifically
referenced the legislation ending the display of tobacco products in shops, which will
be fully implemented in April 2015, and the EU Tobacco Products Directive’s
requirements for packaging. Some respondents suggested that these other
measures should be fully implemented and evaluated before progressing with a
policy of standardised packaging, and that the process was therefore against the
Government’s better regulation principles. Some respondents felt that a policy of
standardised packaging would be “gold plating” of EU measures. Some also believed
that the policy “goalposts” had been moved, with the aims of the policy being
widened since 2012.
4.38. Some respondents believed that standardised packaging would be a
disproportionate measure because there is a long term decline in the numbers of
young people smoking, young people represent a small proportion of smokers and
that they feel education is a better approach to target this problem. They also felt that
consumers were already adequately informed about health risks and that there is an
absence of evidence on packaging as a factor in smoking initiation.
4.39. There were also some complaints about the policy process from opponents of the
policy. They referenced the six week consultation period as too short, and the timing
over summer as being problematic for responding comprehensively. Some felt that
the policy process on the whole was happening too quickly to consider all impacts of
the policy, and referenced that requests to extend the consultation period had been
rejected. Some respondents felt that the Government had already decided to go
ahead with standardised packaging before running the consultation.
4.40. Other respondents felt that the consultation document outlined the issues well, and
welcomed the clarity given by the draft regulations as to the details of the policy, how
it would work in practice and how it would be enforced. Some approved of the six
week consultation timeframe, referencing the fact that this policy has been consulted
on before.
Alternative Measures
4.41. Respondents in support of the policy called for it to be a part of a wider
comprehensive strategy of tobacco control, which they argued would be the most
effective approach. Suggested additional policies included increased media
presence, more funding for stop smoking services, tax increases and a ban on
sponsoring of sporting events by tobacco companies.
4.42. Some respondents who do not support standardised packaging suggested that other
measures would be more effective, including improved education, targeted
campaigns and a focus of activity towards responsible parenting. Some also
recommended that access to tobacco for under 18 year olds should be further
restricted to stop proxy purchasing by adults. 
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
19
No comment
4.43. Some respondents from the tobacco industry did not provide a detailed response to
this question as they believe the proposed regulations to be unlawful. Other
respondents from the tobacco industry reserved their rights in relation to the
regulations and said nothing further.
Comments
4.44. Those respondents who addressed this question either provided comments on
specific parts of the draft regulations or suggested recommendations for
implementation, should the proposals come into force. Some also suggested
possible alternative policies that they believed would address the objectives instead
of standardised packaging.
4.45. Some respondents in support of standardised packaging welcomed the inclusion of
health warnings on tobacco packets. Some were content that the draft regulations
would require dark colours rather than light as they considered that this addressed
public misconceptions about differing levels of risk and harm caused by tobacco
products.
4.46. Some respondents from the tobacco industry felt that the distinction in the
regulations between cigarettes and hand rolling tobacco and other tobacco products
was unjustified. Specialist tobacco manufacturers, importers and retailers, however,
welcomed the proposed exemption of specialist tobacco products, but outlined their
arguments to ensure that in future these products were not included. These
arguments included that consumption of specialist tobacco products is relatively low,
especially amongst young people, that consumption levels are declining and that the
wider range of brands and product types could mean that the policy would be
complex to implement. They also pointed to what they saw as an anomaly in the
revised EU Tobacco Products Directive regulations, which had been incorporated in
to the draft regulations, whereby specialist tobacco products are permitted to have
additional smell, tastes and flavours, but these cannot be referred to or described on
the packaging. Whilst recognising that this is consistent with the Tobacco Products
Directive legislation, they asked for specific allowances to do so.
4.47. Some health professionals and local authorities felt that there was a need to include
all tobacco products and some extended this to include cigarette filters and paper.
Some respondents were concerned that differentiating between tobacco products
would create the misconception that some were more harmful than others. Others
felt that e-cigarettes should be considered under these regulations, with concerns
Question 3
Do you have any comments on the draft regulations, including anything you
want to draw to our attention on the practicalities of implementing the
regulations, as drafted?
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
20
that consumers may choose to move to these “more attractively packaged”
alternatives if the regulations came into force.
Regulation amendment suggestions
4.48. Some respondents called for specific amendments to the draft regulations. These
included:
• More specific regulations regarding the length and size of cigarettes. There
was some concern that tobacco manufacturers could re-brand cigarillos to
avoid standardised packaging requirements.
• The removal of bevelled or rounded edges on packs.
• Minimum pack sizes to allow for adequate sizing of health warning
messages.
• Minimum pack sizes in terms of quantity of cigarettes in each pack. Some
respondents suggested a set amount of 20 cigarettes and 30g of hand-rolling
tobacco. It was felt by some that this would prevent tobacco companies from
being able to offer “free” cigarette incentives.
• Limits to the types of opening mechanisms permitted on packs, only allowing
for “flip top” lids and not permitting “shoulder hinged” lids.
• Limiting the wording on cigarette sticks to identification codes only.
• Addition of braille warnings and product names for the visually impaired.
• Age restrictions to be added onto packets to make it clear that the products
are not for sale to those under the age of 18.
• Quitlines to be mandated on packs.
• The removal of some specific brand names such as “slim”, “gold” or “silver”
as these could mislead consumers into thinking that these products were less
harmful than other brands.
• Ensuring that no additive can be added to products to create noise or scent.
• Some respondents observed that the tobacco display regulations allow for a
pictorial list of tobacco products to be provided at the point of sale by retailers
and that standardised packaging would make such lists obsolete
• Price marked packs to be allowed to aid retailers.
• More clarity with regards to the application of the regulations in wholesale
trade and other areas of the supply chain.
• A clearer definition of “warehouse”.
• A more relaxed approach to text size and font on packaging, to enable
retailers to more quickly identify packs. Some export shops also felt that the
requirement to use the Roman alphabet would hinder product selection by a 
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
21
growing number of customers from countries where a different alphabet is
used (for example China or Russia).
• Anti-smuggling devices to be built into the standardised packs, with some
recommending the implementation of standardised packaging after the
introduction of a track and trace system as required by the Tobacco Products
Directive. Some also referenced “codentify”, a system developed by Philip
Morris International to ensure pack security.
Implementation and Timetable
4.49. Retailers emphasised the need for current stock to be sold before standardised
packaging came into force. Most respondents addressing proposed sell through
periods were broadly content with proposals in the consultation, but retailers still
outlined that one year was required as a minimum. Some felt that longer was
needed, particularly in wholesalers and warehouses with large quantities of stock.
The timing of any introduction of standardised packaging was asked to take account
of the implementation of other policies such as the display regulations and the
Tobacco Products Directive.
Enforcement
4.50. Several local authorities advocated the need to ensure that trading standards officers
were equipped and trained in order to implement the measures. Trading standards
responses also raised the need for resources. These responses were often quick to
re-iterate that illicit trade was not a new problem, and as such they felt capable to
deal with the issue in the future. One potential new challenge was the difficulty in
monitoring and enforcing distance retail sales. Trading standards respondents also
suggested a stricter penalty for those who contravene the regulations.
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
22
4.51. Responses to this question were detailed and commented on the methods and
assumptions used in the impact assessment alongside some more general
comments about the policy and possible unintended consequences.
4.52. Some respondents who were not in support of standardised packaging criticised the
impact assessment, stating that it did not substantiate that standardised packaging is
necessary, appropriate or proportionate. Such respondents believed that the process
followed was biased towards the implementation of standardised packaging and that
the impact assessment does not comply with regulatory guidelines. They also argued
that the impact assessment was oversimplified and generalised.
Benefits
4.53. Some respondents welcomed that the impact assessment drew out the financial
burden of tobacco use and the potential economic benefits that could be gained with
the introduction of standardised packaging. Some referenced Australian data and
some local authorities also gave examples of the ways in which smoking impacts
negatively on their local economies.
4.54. Other respondents, however, were of the view that the impact assessment
overestimated the benefits and gave insufficient assessment of the policy against its
stated objectives. Some respondents from the tobacco industry criticised the
methodology for calculating the potential reduction in smoking prevalence, stating
that this was based on a single exercise which in their view was subjective and
biased. Such respondents argued that the impact assessment failed to take into
account a number of key factors, including existing trends in smoking prevalence, the
e-cigarette market and the impact of other regulatory measures.
Costs
4.55. Some respondents from within the tobacco supply chain believed that the impact
assessment did not have sufficient grasp of commercial reality, with a lack of realworld
assessment of costs such as the impact on; branding, jobs, consumer surplus,
the exclusion of non-UK shareholders, competition, packaging and design. Some
argued that the costs had been underestimated, particularly with regards to the
impact on tobacco manufacturers, retailers and those involved in packaging and
design. A further criticism was that significant impacts were not quantified, instead
relying on “best guesses”.
4.56. Some argued that the impact assessment did not fully take into account the
possibility of unintended consequences such as impact on illicit trade or increased
prevalence of smoking due to down trading and price competition. A specific criticism
was that the impact assessment did not fully consider the costs to the hand rolling
Question 4
Are you aware of any further evidence or information which would improve
the assumptions or estimates we have made in the consultation-stage
impact assessment?
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
23
tobacco market. Other respondents agreed with the suggested mitigating measure of
increased taxation to reduce the impact of down trading and a strengthening of the
enforcement regime to tackle any risk of growth in the illicit market.
4.57. There was some discussion in responses on the issue of consumer surplus. Some
respondents felt that standardised packaging would remove a key means by which
consumers were able to exercise freely their economic rights of purchase, reducing
consumer capacity to differentiate between products. Others, however, felt that the
choice available would not be restricted, with some suggesting that the impact
assessment over-states the loss in consumer surplus as the addictive nature of
cigarettes is not explicitly addressed.
4.58. Some responses focused on the issue of employment, suggesting that there could
be a negative impact on UK employment. This issue was reflected in the postcard
campaign from Unite the Union. This fear spanned a range of sectors along the
supply chain from tobacco manufacturers to small retailers. Other respondents
believed that the policy could have a number of other potential impacts on the
economy of the UK, including making the UK a less attractive place for foreign
investment.
4.59. Some respondents expressed fears over an increase in cross-border purchasing,
believing that consumers could switch to buying tobacco products from neighbouring
countries which still permitted branded packs. Others, however, noted that when the
UK introduced coloured picture warnings on packaging ahead of other European
countries, this did not cause an increase in cross border shopping, arguing that
standardised packaging was also unlikely to cause this effect.
4.60. Further criticisms included that the impact assessment used an incorrect assumption
that capital can be re-allocated elsewhere to eliminate lost profits, did not provide
complete analysis of the losses in consumer welfare and did not properly assess the
potential impact on the taxpayer. Specifically, some respondents criticised the impact
assessment for not including “multiplier effects” of losses to the Exchequer, or
negative effects on the legitimate tobacco supply chain.
4.61. Some respondents believed that the impact assessment underestimated the value of
intellectual property and brands, and consequently the costs did not accurately
reflect the compensation liability that the Government could incur if successfully
challenged in the courts. Some respondents estimated this amount to be in the
billions.
Impact on retailers
4.62. Opponents felt that there would be a number of potential specific negative impacts
on retailers that should be further considered in the impact assessment.
4.63. One issue raised was that of transaction times. Many retailers who responded felt
that standardised packaging would make it more difficult to distinguish between
brands requested by customers during a sale and therefore increase transaction
times. It was believed that this could lead to dissatisfied customers, increased staff
costs and putting retailers at personal risk of attack or theft whilst their backs are
turned away from the shop floor. Some respondents suggested stocking cigarettes in
alphabetical order as a solution to this potential problem, though some retailers
pointed out that usually stock is organised by popularity. A number of studies on
transaction times were referenced, which had conflicting results. Those who were 
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
24
opposed to the policy quoted studies which showed an increase in transaction times,
and those who supported the policy quoted studies which showed an overall
decrease in transaction times following implementation of the policy in Australia.
4.64. Retailers also discussed the potential impact on their profit margins. It was felt by
some that standardised packaging would lead to consumers down trading from
premium products to less expensive products, on which the profit margins are lower.
Respondents believed that this could have a serious negative impact on their
business and could result in the risking of jobs and the viability of their business as a
whole. This was related to the issue of footfall, with retailers believing that decreased
footfall from reduced tobacco sales could put their business at risk as tobacco
shoppers spend more per visit than non-tobacco shoppers, by buying other goods in
store. The issue of reduced footfall was also raised by wholesalers. Other
respondents highlighted that profit margins are small on tobacco products compared
to other types of product and acknowledged that tobacco sales are undergoing long
term decline, suggesting that retailers are already having to adjust to this.
4.65. Some retailers also noted that the impact assessment was only published in English.
This was felt to isolate a large group of independent retailers.
Export Shops
4.66. Export shops argued that the impact on them would be disproportionate and that
they should therefore be exempted from the regulations. Respondents from this
sector believed that a unique solution had been reached for them in the tobacco
display legislation which took account of the nature of this retail channel, its
competitive field (with airlines or neighbouring countries who would not have to
introduce the policy) and its contribution to airport revenue. They also pointed out
that they account for only a small proportion of total UK tobacco sales (around 1%)
and that the nature of the sale is unique. They noted that duty-free tobacco is only
sold to customers leaving the EU and that a significant proportion of customers are
foreign nationals, with some not being English speaking which they felt would make it
very difficult for them to distinguish between products in standardised packaging.
Packaging and design companies
4.67. Packaging and design companies felt that the impact assessment did not include
sufficient detail in relation to the loss of business to packaging producers. They
believe that it is inconsistent that this is recorded as a negative impact but also
recorded as a cost saving to business. It was suggested that further consideration of
the technicalities of packaging manufacturing and the complexity of packs was
required.
General
4.68. Some respondents believed that the baseline scenario was flawed, and that the
legality of the Tobacco Products Directive should not be assumed.
4.69. A number of respondents pointed out that the impact assessment had received an
“amber” rating by the Regulatory Policy Committee (RPC).
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
25
Recommendations
4.70. Respondents on both sides of the debate made a range of recommendations for the
impact assessment. These included;
• Option 1 to be fully costed
• The development and costing of alternative options
• Consultation with other Government Departments about the policy
• The use of econometric techniques to distinguish among the multiple
factors on a single outcome such as smoking prevalence
• Further assessment of the impact on illicit trade and other potential
negative impacts
• More consideration to be given to data emerging from Australia
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
26
5. Campaigns
5.1. This section provides a summary of the campaign responses received. There were 8
campaigns run in response to this consultation, all of which were opposed to the policy.
British American Tobacco Pension Company:
Campaign
Name
No campaign
name
Key Points from Campaign
Organising
Group
British American
Tobacco Pension
Company
Re: UK Department of Health Consultation on
Standardised Packaging of Tobacco Products
As a pensioner of British American Tobacco, I
am writing to express my opposition to plain
packaging of tobacco.
There is no credible evidence that children start
smoking because of the packaging, or that
‘plain’ packaging will deter children from
smoking. To the contrary, evidence suggests
that people start smoking because their parents
and peers smoke; therefore the most effective
measures to reduce youth smoking are
education, public engagement, and enforcement
of laws related to the black market and age
verification. There is a great deal of speculation
about the effect of plain packaging, as outlined
in the recent Chantler Report, which noted that it
was only ‘plausible’ that plain packs might have
an effect. Speculation and conjecture are no
substitute for hard facts.
The facts from Australia are clear; shipments of
tobacco products have increased; the black
market has increased; and the decline in
smoking rates has slowed.
I urge you to delay consideration of any
regulations on this issue: the upcoming tobacco
display ban, which will not be fully implemented
until 2015, has not yet been fully reviewed. In
addition, a new set of tobacco controls was
recently passed in Europe which has not begun
to be implemented.
Format
Type(s)
Standard Letter &
Standard Email
Number of
Responses
824
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
27
FOREST:
Campaign
Name
Hands off our
packs
Key Points
Organising
Group
FOREST I am writing to express my opposition to plain
packaging of tobacco.
A four-month government consultation in 2012
resulted in over 665,000 responses, with a
substantial majority (427,888) opposed to the
policy. I urge you to respect the outcome of that
consultation which members of the public
responded in good faith.
There is no credible evidence that children start
smoking because of the packaging, or that
'plain' packaging will deter children from
smoking. Speculation and conjecture are no
substitute for hard facts.
Before pressing ahead with legislation I urge
you to wait until the government has studied the
impact of the of the tobacco display ban, which
will not be fully implemented until 2015, and the
introduction of the larger health warnings which
are being introduced in 2016 as part of the EU's
revised Tobacco Products
Directive.
Format
Type(s)
Standard email,
standard letter, &
signed petition
Number of
Responses
123,269
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
28
Imperial Tobacco:
Campaign
Name
Imperial Tobacco
letter to
pensioners
Key Points
Organising
Group
Imperial Tobacco Standardised packaging has severe unintended
consequences and there is no credible, or new,
evidence that it will achieve the Department of
Health’s objectives. In Australia, the only country
to have implemented standardised packaging, the
facts are clear – smoking prevalence has not
decreased whilst illicit trade has increased by
20% since its introduction, now accounting for
13.9% of total consumption (KPMG, 2014).
During the 2012 public consultation over 425,000
respondents stated that they were against
standardised packaging. This accounted for
around two-thirds of all responses. If the
proposals are introduced it would affect
consumers, wholesalers, retailers, and of course,
our business and livelihoods.
Standardised packaging has to be stopped; with
only three weeks remaining before the
Government consultation closes it is vitally
important that we make a rational and fact based
stand. If you share our concerns, please show
your support by signing the ‘No Prime Minister’
petition: www.noprimeminister.org.uk
Format
Type(s)
Invitation to
participate in
campaign letter
signed by
participants
Number of
Responses
7
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
29
UNITE:
Campaign
Name
Standardised
Packaging
Tobacco
Products = UK
Jobs At Risk
Key Points
Organising
Group
UNITE I support Unit the Union in their response to the UK
Government Consultation on standardised
packaging of tobacco products.
I do not believe the UK Government should move
forward with standardised packaging proposal
because:
1. A ban on the use of branding, logos or colours on
packs would lead to an increase in the illicit trade in
tobacco which in turn could become both more
attractive and accessible to young people.
2. The evidence from Australia (KPMG Report)
shows that the illicit tobacco trade has increased
since the policy was introduced there in 2012. Even
the UK Government’s own Impact Assessment on
plain packaging suggests there would be an
increase of non-UK duty paid cigarettes as a result.
3. The proposals are therefore a threat to thousands
of well-paid and highly skilled UK jobs and to
investment in the packaging and tobacco sectors.
I wish to register my strong opposition to the draft
regulations and would request that the information
and views supplied on this form be sent to the
Department of Health on my behalf.
Format
Type(s)
Campaign
Postcard
Number of
Responses
2,290
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
30
Tobacco Retailers Alliance:
Campaign
Name
No to Plain Packs Key Points
Organising
Group
Tobacco Retailers
Alliance
Response to the Standardised Tobacco
Packaging Consultation – 2014
I am a retailer who sells tobacco.
I am opposed to standardised/plain packaging
as it would:
• Fuel the black market in counterfeit and
smuggled tobacco. This has been the effect in
Australia. Already, up to 16% of cigarettes
consumed in the UK are not bought in UK retail,
and this will get worse.
• Frustrate my customers as I need to spend
more time serving them.
• Add more restrictions. The tobacco display ban
is not even implemented yet. Europe has just
decided to ban packs of fewer than 20
cigarettes, packs of less than 30g of tobacco
and menthol cigarettes.
Format
Type(s)
Campaign Postcard
Number of
Responses
10,001
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
31
Local Campaigns:
Campaign
Name
No name given Key Points
Organising
Group
Local Campaign
1 – no clear
organising group
UK Department of Health Consultation on Plain
Packaging
I am a non-smoker but am writing to state my
opinion on standardised packaging proposals in
the UK and the likely effects upon smoking habits,
particularly upon children.
Plain packaging will have no more effect upon
adult smokers than any amount of graphic
deterrents already on packets. The adult
committed smoker will continue to smoke whatever
the cigarette is presented in until he or she has a
positive desire to stop smoking.
The bigger issue is whether the current proposals
will contribute towards a reduction in young
children taking up smoking.
My view is that it will do precisely the opposite.
Young children are influenced by their elders’ and
their parents’ behaviour and giving the product an
‘invisibility’ will only increase the temptation.
Furthermore, plain packaging will, as has been
demonstrated in Australia, increase the black
market in tobacco products dramatically, resulting
in a ready supply of cheap (and probably more
dangerous) products on the streets where there be
no control or restriction of sale to young persons.
The way to go about discouraging the young from
taking up smoking is education, education and
more education. I urge you to give very careful
consideration to this issue as in my view it spells
disaster for the campaign to discourage the young
from taking up the habit.
Format
Type(s)
Standard Letter
Number of
Responses
4
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
32
Campaign
Name
No Name Key Points
Organising
Group
Local
Campaign 2
– no clear
organising
group
I am writing this letter as a formal response to the
Department of Health consultation on the ‘standardised
packaging of tobacco products’ which was launched on
16th April 2012.
I would like to express my views in writing and detail my
objections to any such regulation.
I wish to draw your attention to the following points in
support of my position:
• There was no evidence at the time of the 2012 public
consultation and there is still no evidence now that Plain
Packaging will actually have any positive public health
impacts.
• This is also the third public consultation in the past six
years on this subject. None have progressed due to lack
of evidence that the proposal would have the desired
impact. There is still no evidence so why would you wish
to progress this regulation now?
• The UK is consulting on Plain Packaging despite the
fact that the Display Ban has not yet been fully completed
and the results of this legislation yet to be realised.
• The UK is already heavily disadvantaged due to high
levels of taxation compared to other EU member
countries. Circa 50% of RYO is estimated to be non UK
duty paid and 16% of the ready-made cigarette market.
Plain Packaging would potentially increase the size of this
problem denying the UK millions in lost tax. At a time
when the country is facing such austerity measures this
seems illogical?
• This is being realised in Australia already where there
has been an increase in illicit trade from 11.8% to 13.9%
according to a recent KPMG report.
• The European Products Directive comes into effect in
May 2016 increasing the size and cost of an adult
smokers tobacco purchase. This will bring to the fore
these uncompetitive retail prices versus other member
states. Why cement the problem further as discussed
with Plain Packaging?
• The amount of counterfeit stock will rise even further
with further financial reductions to the Treasury.
• The main beneficiaries from this regulation are other
member states and criminals who will take advantage of
the opportunity presented through Plain Packaging.
• Ultimately would it not make sense for the Government
to understand the impact of TPD and Display Ban before
pushing ahead with more regulation especially regulation
with no evidence to support its introduction.
• Even taking into account health concerns, would it not
Format
Type(s)
Standard
Letter
Number of
Responses
4
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
33
make sense to be fully in control of the tobacco market in
the UK through regulation of 100%UK duty paid volume.
Any regulation introduced leads purely to an increase in
illicit trade and the removal of Government influence from
both a health and commercial perspective.
I would like you to review these points before proceeding
with any formal legislation.
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
34
Campaign
Name
No Name Key Points
Organising
Group
Local Campaign 3 –
no clear organising
group
I am totally against your proposal to put tobacco
into plain packs. Perhaps if you worked 12
hours a day, 7 days a week to earn a living in
the toughest retail environment I can remember
you realise what an ill conceived idea this is.
Both my staff and I work hard to ensure we meet
all the relevant laws on age restrictions whether
it be alcohol, lottery or tobacco. At every turn all
you want to do is add more regulation at a time
when we are crying out for less!
This will undoubtedly play into the hands of the
illegal sellers who in my area get away with it on
a daily basis without any concern of being
caught.
I have seen no evidence from any sector that
this will work! In fact quite the opposite it will
increase under age smoking because no one
will be able to see the difference in the illegal
packs.
This is an ill thought out plan from the zealots in
the health dept and a gutless political elite who
think the electorate will be impressed with them!
While what they are actually doing is alienating
10 million smokers while making a few in the
health depot happy because the vast majority of
the electorate couldn’t give a damn!
STOP THIS STUPID IDEA NOW
Format
Type(s)
Standard Letter
Number of
Responses
5
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
35
Appendix A
List of Organisations and Businesses that responded to the consultation
Businesses
Business or Sole
Trader Name
Job Title of
Respondent
Type of
Business or
Sole Trader
Other type of business or
sole trader
1st Stop 2 shop
(Dundee)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
A G Parfett & Sons Ltd Wholesale
tobacco seller
A S Supermarket
(Walsall)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
A3 Food & Wine
(Surbiton)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Aelia UK Limited Managing
Director Duty-free shop
Agemos - Italian
Association of
Tobacco Distributors
n/a
Other type of
business
representative
organisation
AIPPI - The Lithuanian
Group of the
International
Association for the
Protection of
Intellectual Property
President of
AIPPI Lithuanian
Group
Other type of
business
representative
organisation
AJ's Convenience
Store (Nottingham)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Albert Square Stores
(None Given)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Ali and Son
(Motherwell)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Amcor
Business
involved in the
design or
manufacture of
packaging
Ameen News Ltd
(Heywood)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
36
Amir and Son
(Edinburgh)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
AMMA Service Station Service Station
Owner
Tobacco retailer
(other type of
shop or
business)
Andover Road Post
Office (Nottingham)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Angel Food & Wine
(Ipswich)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Arcade News
(Bedford)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Arkays Ltd (Thornton
Heath)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Arken POP
International
Business
involved in the
design or
manufacture of
packaging
AS Food & Wine
(Telford)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
ASD Off-License
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
ASHS Convenience
Store (Manchester)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Asian Trader
Magazine Other
AUR Newsagent
(Birmingham)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Ayngaran Service
Station
Service Station
Owner
Tobacco retailer
(other type of
shop or
business)
Bank Convenience
Store (Redditch)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Barford Village Shop -
Church Street -
Barford - Warwickshire
- CV35 8EN
Shop Manager
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
37
Bargain Booze
(Kendal)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Bargain Booze
(Leeds)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Bargain Booze
(Netherfield)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Bargain Booze Plus
(Cheshire)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Barnes Express Retail
Newsagents
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Baron's Newsagents
(Merseyside)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Barrow Stores -
Costcutter (Bury St
Edmunds)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Beacon News (West
Midlands)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Beasleys CTN
(London)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Beghal Food Stores
(Birmingham)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Belle Vue
Convenience
(Middlesborough)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Bellshill Post Office
(Bellshill)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Bench Road Store
(Buxton)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Benkert UK Ltd Director
Business
involved in the
design or
manufacture of
packaging
Tipping paper manufacturer
Bentley Food and
Wines (Walsall)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
38
Bentley News
(Walsall)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Best One (Bensham)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Best One (Leicester)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Best One (Stradishall)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Best One / Genesis
(Hammersmith)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Bestway Cash & Carry Group Trading
Director
Wholesale
tobacco seller
Bhutta's Newsagents
(Ibrox)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Bills Supermarket Ltd
(Nuneaton)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Birdwell News (South
Yorkshire)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Birmingham Airport Chief Executive
Officer Duty-free shop
Birmington Common
Stores (Chesterfield)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Blackfen Off License
(Sidcup)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Boosdeck (Saltburnby-the-sea)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Booths Convenience
Store (Swanwick)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Booze and Booze
(Oldbury)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Booze Barn
(Nottingham)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Bottle and Can (None
Given)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
39
Bownass Newsagent
(Morely)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
BP Bush 422
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
BP Heckmonduke
Service Station
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
BP Ward End
(Birmingham)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Brackenboro Post
Office (Brackenboro)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Bristol Airport Commercial
Director Other Airport operating a Duty
Free shop
Britannia Wines
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
British American
Tobacco (BAT)
Tobacco
manufacturer
British American
Tobacco (Romania)
Investment SRL
Tobacco
manufacturer
British American
Tobacco Indonesia
Tobacco
manufacturer
Broadlea Mini Market
(Leeds)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Broadwater Store
(Fleetwood)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Broseley News
(Brosley)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Brothers Convenience
(Fareham)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Brownmoor Express
(Crosby)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Brucciani (Carlisle) Ltd
(Carlisle)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
C.J. News (Olton)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
40
Cannon News (Pinner)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Canon Pyon PO &
Stores n/a
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Cantleys Spar (County
Antrim)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Cardewlees Service
Station (Carlisle)
Tobacco retailer
(other type of
shop or
business)
Service Station Owner
Cardord News
(Glasgow)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Cards and Gifts 'R' Us
(Essex)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Cash and Carry
(Mablethorpe)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Castleford Stores
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Cavern News
(Liverpool)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Centra (Derry)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Charlie's Candy
(Sidcup)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Churchill Drinks (Hall
Green)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
City News (Leicester)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Claires @ Queen
Margarat Drive
(Glasgow)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Classic Services North
East Ltd (Billingham)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Clavert Newsagents
Ltd (Port St Mary)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
41
Cmabridge Grove
(Eccles)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Coalway News &
Booze
(Wolverhampton)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Cofton Mini Market
(Birmingham)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Cofton News and
Wines (Birmingham)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Cogans (Carmarthen)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Colchester News Ltd
(Colchester)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Cole Valley News &
Off-license
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Comedy Fair
(Southall)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Common Lane
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Connoiseurs Wine Ltd
(Southend-on-sea)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Coombs Store
(Birmingham)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Copelands (Sidcup)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Corner Stores
(Oswestry)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Corse Hill Mini Market
(Manchester)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Costcutter (Bishopton)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Costcutter (Bolton)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
42
Costcutter (Bullesley)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Costcutter (Coleraine)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Costcutter (Coventry)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Costcutter (Mansfield)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Costcutter (Sheffield)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Costcutter
(Sunderland)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Costcutter (Wigan)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Costcutter (Worcester
Park)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Countdown Family
Store (Dundee)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Countdown Family
Store (Forfar)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Country Stores (None
Given)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Countryside Store Ltd
(Bale)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Creative Production
Workshop
Business
involved in the
design or
manufacture of
packaging
Cross News (London)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Cross Roads OffLicense
(Wakefield)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
43
D Robertson
Newsagent
(Birkenhead)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Dafen Service Station
(Llanelli)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Service Station Owner
Daily News (High
Peak)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
David Jones Design
Limited
Business
involved in the
design or
manufacture of
packaging
Davidoff Distribution
(UK) LIMITED Accountant Wholesale
tobacco seller
Day To Day Limited
(Isle of Man)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Day to Day Ltd
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Day Today (Hamilton)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Day Today (Lanark)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Day Today
(Motherwell)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Dee Bee Cash & Carry Buyer Wholesale
tobacco seller
Dee Jay Ltd (Mordern)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Dee's Convenience
(Hayling Island)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Detleys Supermarkets
(Cowley)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Dhamecha Foods
Limited
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
DHL Daily Stores
(Walsall)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
44
Dhruv News (Walsall)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Dorchester
Newsagents
(Stockport)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
DRA News (Newport)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Drinks World (Bellshill)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Drum Street
Supermarket
(Edinburgh)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Duncan's Mini Market
(Preston)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Edd Herring Services
Ltd
Managing
Director
Retail
representative
organisation
Edwards @ Bebington
(Bebington)
Tobacco retailer
(other type of
shop or
business)
Service Station Owner
Edwards Lane
(Mansfield)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Elm Lane News
(Sheffield)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Elmleigh Con Store
Ltd (Leigh-on-sea)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Elmsell Post Office
(Elmsell)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Emmerton News
(Wolverhampton)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Esher Wines Retail
Newsagents
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Essentra Corporate Affairs
Director
Business
involved in the
design or
manufacture of
packaging
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
45
Essex Mart
(Southend-on-sea)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
ET White & Sons
(Horevalley)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Euro Wines (Liverpool)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Exeter International
Airport
Tobacco retailer
(other type of
shop or
business)
Falcon News
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Family Choice
Superstore (Anstey)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Family Mart Limited
(Lingdale)
Tobacco retailer
(other type of
shop or
business)
Service Station Owner
Family Shopper
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Farah News
(Glasgow)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Fazal and Sons
(Edinburgh)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Flatfoot Sam's
(Cwmbran)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Food and Wine
(Nottingham)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Foodfare
(Wolverhampton)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Forgewood Post Office
(Motherwell)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Fountain News
(Cheshire)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
46
Fountain Street News
(Leeds)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Frances St News
(Newtownards)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Francis Street News
(Leicester)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Freddies (Glasgow)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Fudge Newsagents
(Glasgow)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
G & E Wallage Ltd
(Chesterfield)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
G 7 Speed Retail
Newsagents
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
G K Supermarket
(Leicester)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Ganas Food & Wine Retail
Newsagents
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Gatwick Airport
Limited
Tobacco retailer
(other type of
shop or
business)
GAWITH HOGGARTH
T.T. Ltd
National Sales
Manager
Business
involved in the
design or
manufacture of
packaging
Geoff's Convenience
Store (Belper)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Ghedrul Services
(Oswestry)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Gladstone
Convenience
(Darlington)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Glendale Stores Ltd
(Belfast)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
47
Gods Gift (Bilston)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Grain Handler USA President Other
Grain Handler is a leading
manufacturer of patented
grain handling equipment,
with an emphasis on
“Continuous Mix-Flow
Dryers.”
Gravelly Lane News
(Erdington)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Greenley's Wine Ltd
(Milton Keynes)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Group 3 News
(Renfrew)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Gurpreet Singh Ltd
(Manchester)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Hadley Park Stores
(Hadley)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Hambleton Service
Station (Hambleton)
Tobacco retailer
(other type of
shop or
business)
Service Station Owner
Hambleton Village Off
License (Hambleton)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Hamilton News
(Belfast)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Harbourside Gift Shop
(North Yorkshire)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Harvil Road Post
Office (Middlesex)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Havana House Ltd Director Specialist
tobacconist
Haybridge News
(Telford)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Hazel's Newsagents
(County Down)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
48
Heathrow Airport Head of
Category
Tobacco retailer
(other type of
shop or
business)
Heera Convenience
store Manager
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Heera International
Food Store
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Heintz van Landewyck
Business
involved in the
design or
manufacture of
packaging
Herdan News
(Macclesfield)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
High Street News
(Derbyshire)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Hill Wood Newsmarket
(Northfield)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Hinderwell Post Office
(Saltburn)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Hollybane News
(Birmingham)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Holmfield Road New
(Blackpool)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Home Farm
Convenience Store
(Leicester)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Honeycomb News &
Supermarkets
(Southend-on-sea)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Hunnyhill Stores
Group Partner
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Hunters & Frankau
Limited
Tobacco retailer
(other type of
shop or
business)
Huoung Que
Supermarket
(Birmingham)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
49
Idea Couture Ltd. Managing
Director
Business
involved in the
design or
manufacture of
packaging
Business & Innovation
Consultancy
Iggesund Sales Manager
Tobacco
Business
involved in the
design or
manufacture of
packaging
Ignis Group Account
Director
Business
involved in the
design or
manufacture of
packaging
Ignis Ltd
Business
involved in the
design or
manufacture of
packaging
Illegible
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Illegible
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Illegible
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Illegible
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Illegible
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Illegible
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Illegible
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Illegible
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Illegible
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Illegible (Blaydon on
Tyne)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
50
Illegible (Bramley)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Illegible (Castleford)
Tobacco retailer
(other type of
shop or
business)
Service Station Owner
Illegible (Glasgow)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Illegible (Glasgow)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Illegible (Kendal)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Illegible (Walsall)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
imperial Tobacco Sales
Representative
Tobacco
manufacturer
Imperial Tobacco
Australia
Tobacco
manufacturer
Imperial Tobacco Ltd Tobacco
manufacturer
IMY's Stop 'N' Shop
(Cowley)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Ingham Mini Market
(Lincoln)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
J & K Supermarket
(Hayling Island)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
J & K Supermarket
(Hayling Island)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
J J Fox Trading Ltd Managing
Director
Wholesale
tobacco seller
J.Cortès Cigars Managing
Director
Tobacco
manufacturer
J.W.I. Perkings and
Son (Horncastle)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
J&S General Store
(Walsall)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Japan Tobacco Inc.
(JT)
Tobacco
manufacturer
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
51
Japan Tobacco
International (JTI)
Tobacco
manufacturer
Jaspals (Nottingham)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Javed Brothers T/A
(Glasgow)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Jay's Convenience
(Nottingham)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Joes News & Wine
(Wolverhampton)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Johal Uquor Store Retail
Newsagents
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
John Hollingsworth &
Son Ltd
Wholesale
tobacco seller
Johnny's Local
(Renfrew)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
JPS Stores
(Manchester)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Julie's (Telford)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
K & J Convenience
Store (Cadishead)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
K'S Wines
(Birmingham)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Kelly's Eurospar
(Moneymore)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
KPMG LLP Partner Other Independent audit, tax and
advisory business
Landmark Wholesale Managing
Director
Tobacco retailer
(other type of
shop or
business)
Lawrence Hunt & Co
Ltd
Managing
Director
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Leo's Primer Store
(Worsley)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
52
Lewis Property
Development LTD
Company
Secretary
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Lifestyle Express
(Walsall)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Lifestyle Express
(Wolverhampton)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Lindas News
(Darlington)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Liverpool John Lennon
Airport Retail Director Other
Airport Owner who has a
Duty Free Store at our
location
Llanelli Market
(Llanelli)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
LLANGYBI STORES Proprietor
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Lomas News
(Lancashire)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Londis (Edinburgh)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Londis (Erdington)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Londis
(Loughborough)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Londis (Preston)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Londis (Sidcup)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Londis (Sutton)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Londis (Waterloo)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Londis Harefield
(Harefield)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
53
Londis Store (Bootle)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Londis Store
(Swillington)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Londis Tickford
Superstore (Newport)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Lord Lone Post Office
(Manchester)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Lorfords (Bury St
Edmunds)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Lucky's Off License
(Leeds)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Lurgan Filling Station
(Lurgan)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Luxmy Enterprise Retail
Newsagents
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Lyndhurst Store
(Blidworth)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Lyndhurst Stores
(Mansfield)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
M & S Stores
(Cumbria)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
M. Keevens's News
(Derbyshire)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
MACE (Carnlough)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Mackenzie General
Store (Holloway)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Madhu Stores (Leeds)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Malik Newsagents
(Glasgow)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
54
Manor Rd Stores
(Scarborough)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Manor Store (Horbury)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Maple Street Stores Partner
Tobacco retailer
(other type of
shop or
business)
Mare Street Service
Station (London)
Tobacco retailer
(other type of
shop or
business)
Service Station Owner
Market News (County
Durham)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Marsh Hill News
(London)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Marty's News & Booze
(Birmingham)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Maya Stores (Llanelli)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Maz Newsagents
(Beswick)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
McCrystal's Filling
Station
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
McDonalds Todays
(County Armagh)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
McKeevers News
(Derry)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Meeka Wines
(Birmingham)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Mellors News
(Barnsley)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Metheringham
Convenience Store
(Lincoln)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
55
Metro C21
Supermarket
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Mili Newsagent
(Middlesex)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Millbank News Darlington
Retailer
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Mint Convenience
Store (Stockport)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Moore's Costcutter
(County Antrim)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Morely Stores (Leeds)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Morris & Co (Thornton
Heath)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Mount General Store
(Birkenhead)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Moxley Post Office
(Moxley)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
MRP Limited
(Canterbury)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
MSA (Leeds)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Multi Packaging
Solutions
Business
involved in the
design or
manufacture of
packaging
Mulvir & Sons Ltd
(London)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Mulvir & Sons Ltd
(London)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Murshid's New
(Liverpool)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
56
Myrtle News and
Booze
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
n/a n/a
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
n/a n/a
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
n/a Newsagent
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
n/a Independent
Retailer
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Nagra Stores
(Birmingham)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
National News
(Wostenholme Road)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Natsons (London)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Neha News (Hacuney)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Neil's Store (Kirkastall)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Nesscliffe Service
Station Ltd
(Shrewsbury)
Tobacco retailer
(other type of
shop or
business)
Service Station Owner
New Hall Lane Post
Office (Preston)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Newcastle
International Airport
Ltd
Planning and
Corporate Affairs
Director
Other Airport
News Stand
(Wakefield)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Newsboard Ltd
(County Durham)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Newscentre (Eastcote)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
57
Newsflash (Belfast)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Newspoint (Pinner)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Newton Post Office
(Derbyshire)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Newtrade Publishing
Ltd
Retail
Newsagent
Editor
Retail
representative
organisation
Nisa (Ammanford)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Nisa
(Carmanthenshire)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Nisa (Drefach)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Nisa (Farnworth)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Nisa (Gorslas)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Nisa (Lanark)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Nisa (Llanelli)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Nisa (North Yorkshire)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Nisa (Peterborough)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Nisa (Peterborough)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Nisa (Peterborough)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Nisa Extra (Riddings)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
58
Nisa Local (Alfreton)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Nisa Local (Astley)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Nisa Local
(Cullybackey)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Nisa Local (Holland
Park)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Nisa Local (Preston)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Nisa Local (Sale)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Nisa Local (Walsall)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Nisa Supermarkets
(Huddersfield)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
None Given
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
None Given
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
None Given
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
None Given
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
None Given
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
None Given
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
None Given
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
None Given
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
59
None Given
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
None Given
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
None Given
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
None Given
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
None Given
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
None Given
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
None Given
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
None Given
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
None Given
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
None Given
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
None Given
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
None Given
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
None Given
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
None Given
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
None Given
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
None Given
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
60
None Given
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
None Given
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
None Given
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
None Given
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
None Given
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
None Given
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
None Given
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
None Given
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
None Given
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
None Given
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
None Given
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
None Given
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
None Given
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
None Given
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
None Given
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
None Given
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
61
None Given
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
None Given
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
None Given
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Norman Watt & Son
Limited (County
Antrim)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Not Disclosed Retail
Newsagents
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Not Disclosed Retail
Newsagents
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Not Disclosed Retail
Newsagents
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Not Disclosed Retail
Newsagents
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Not Disclosed Retail
Newsagents
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Not Disclosed Retail
Newsagents
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Nude Brand
Consulting Ltd Creative Partner
Business
involved in the
design or
manufacture of
packaging
O'Kanes Superstore
Ltd (County Armagh)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
O'Reilly's Wholesale
Ltd Director Wholesale
tobacco seller
One Stop Cornershop
(Wallasey)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
One Stop Shop Londis
(Chorley)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
One Wines
(Manchester)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
62
Opolka Ltd Managing
Director
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Oval Fine Wines and
Beers
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Pallim News
(Sunderland News)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Parkers
(Peterborough)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Parkside Flexibles
(Europe) Limited
Business
involved in the
design or
manufacture of
packaging
Path Director
Business
involved in the
design or
manufacture of
packaging
Path Ltd
Business
involved in the
design or
manufacture of
packaging
Pavan's Minimarket
(Rothwell)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Pencoed Muro Service
Station
Tobacco retailer
(other type of
shop or
business)
Service Station Owner
Philip Morris Limited
(PMI)
Tobacco
manufacturer
Plumstead Best and
Save (Plumstead)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Post Office (Auckley)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Post Office (Hollandon-sea)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Post Office Store
(Deanshanger)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
63
Prairie Oak Capital
Other type of
business
representative
organisation
Premier (Dundee)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Premier (Edinburgh)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Premier (New Oscott)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Premier Essentials
(Tutshill)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Premier Jasup
Superstore
(Nottingham)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Premier Maldon
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Price Buster
(Birmingham)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Pricekracker (Dundee)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
R & M News
(Wallasey)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
R & P Chappelow Ltd
(Goole)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
R & S Patel Limited
(Leicester)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
R Late Store
(Birkenhead)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Rainbow Convenience
Store (Cheshire)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Rea's Today (Lanark)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Redd Solicitors LLP Other Legal firm
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
64
Reetmister
Business
involved in the
design or
manufacture of
packaging
Retail Newsagents n/a
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Rhuvaar (Bishopton)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Roff Avenue Store
(Bedford)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Ronnies Newsagents
(Leeds)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Rujal News (Clactonon-sea)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Rupas Mini Market
(Nottingham)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
S D Metha Newsagent
(Croydon)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
S.K. Retailers
(Glasgow)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
S.S Foodstores
(Motherwell)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
S&H News (Glasgow)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Sakthi Service Station
Limited
Service Station
Owner
Tobacco retailer
(other type of
shop or
business)
Scandinavian Tobacco
Group
Head of Public
Affairs
Wholesale
tobacco seller
Seaforth News Post
Office (Seaforth)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Select 'N' Save
(Nottingham)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
65
Select 2 Save (West
Heath)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Select and Save
(Bagueley)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Select and Save
(Bromsgrove)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Select and Save
(Seaforth)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Select Express Retail
Newsagents
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Sheehys (County
Tyrone)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Shelfield Post Office
(Walsall)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Shootershill Store Lts
Costcutter)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Shop N Save Retail
Newsagents
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Shop-Rite Grocers
(Preston)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Shopsmart (Lanark)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Shopsmart (Penfrew)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Shree Rad News
(Whitford)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
SICPA UK Director
Corporate Affairs Other
Provision of secure
traceability and
authentication systems to
governments
Sids Supermarket
(Cross Hands)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Simmons & Simmons
LLP Other
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
66
Smith's Newsagent
(Epsom)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Smiths Corner Stores
(Manby)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
SOCOTAB President and
CEO
Wholesale
tobacco seller
Soouthwold Express
(London)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
South Cliff Mini Market
(Bridlington)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
South Elmsall
Convenience Store
(Pontefract)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Southcliffe Stores
(Clacton)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Southfields Food &
Wine (Southfields)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Sowe Waste Post
Office (Coventry)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Spalding News
(Spalding)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Spar Director
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Spar (Aspen Way,
Wolverhampton)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Spar (Belfast)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Spar (Brightlingsea)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Spar (Carluke)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Spar (County Tyrone)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
67
Spar (Duntocher)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Spar (Fleetwood)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Spar (Llanelli)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Spar (No location
given)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Spar (Portsmouth)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Spar Exorna Filling
Station (Castlerock)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Spar Knott Road
(Knott End On Sea)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Spar Store (Caistor)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Spar Store
(Clydebank)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Spar Store
(Pinchbeck)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Spar Thornton
(Thornton-Cleveleys)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Spar Trinas
Supermarket (Milton
Keynes)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Spick and Span
(Mablethorpe)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Square Newsagents
(Wolverton)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
SRA News
(Birmingham)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Sri Thurka Service
Station
Service Station
Owner
Tobacco retailer
(other type of
shop or
business)
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
68
SRS News
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
St Andrews Food and
Wine
Retail
Newsagents
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Stanley Bus Station
Newsagents
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Star Convenience
Store (Birmingham)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Star News
(Nottingham)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Stone Spar Stores Ltd Managing
Director
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Strictly Liquor
(Wolverhampton)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Sunny News
(Southfields)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Sunrise food and wine
(Bolton)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Supersaver (Bootle)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Supersaver (Bootle)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Supersaver (Liverpool)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Sussex Road Post
Office and Stores
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Swan Food (Holland
Park)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Swillington Post Office
(Swillington)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
T/A Barrs Newagent
(Edinburgh)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
69
T/A Bens Stores
(Edinburgh)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
T/A Budgens
(Southfields)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
T/A Eastern Union
(Edinburgh)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
T/A Lorne News
(Edinburgh)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
T/A Melrose Post
Office (Leicester)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
T/A Pilrig Newsagent
(Edinburgh)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
T/A Woodfield
Newsagents (Essex)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
T/A Young's
(Middlesex)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
T&M Corner Shop
(Nottingham)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
TABAC World Wholesale
tobacco seller
TANN UK Ltd. Managing
Director
Business
involved in the
design or
manufacture of
packaging
TANNPAPIER GmbH Yes Other Tipping paper manufacturer
Target Store
(Glasgow)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Taylor News
(Surbiton)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Taylors (Carmarthen)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Taylors News
(Sheffield)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
70
Thames Food and
Wine
Retail
Newsagents
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Thandi News & Off
License (Bedford)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Thandi Stores (Derby)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
The Co-operative
Group
Tobacco retailer
(supermarket)
The Food Corner
(London)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
The Forecourt Centre
(Doagh)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
The Garage (Comber)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
The Link Service
Station (Derry)
Tobacco retailer
(other type of
shop or
business)
Service Station Owner
The Local Shop
(Preston)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
The Maid Marion Store
(Sneinton)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
The Oval (Sidcup)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
The Paper Chase
(Lurgan)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
The Paper Shop
(Middleton District
Centre)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
The Tap House
(Cleveleys)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Throstle Lane Post
Office
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Todays Local
(Illegible)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
71
Todays Local
(Scarborough)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Tony Off License Ltd
(Chorley)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Top News (Broseley)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
TOR Imports Wholesale
tobacco seller
Trademark Committee
of Japan Intellectual
Property Association
Leader of the 3rd
sub-commitee of
Trademark
Committee
Industry
representative
organisation
Trees Newsagents
(Hook)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Trierenberg Holding
AG Yes Other Tipping paper manufacturer
Trio's Newsagents
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Trispen Stores
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Trshna News
(Edgeware Road)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Tugford News &
Convenience Store
(Birmingham)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Twickenham
Supermarket
(Merseyside)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Tynedale Newsagent
(Tyseley)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
U-Save (Motherwell)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
72
Under Age Sales Ltd Managing
Director Other
We are a social enterprise
that specialises in helping
retailers to tackle under age
sales. We provide support,
training, point-of-sale
materials and advice to
retailers. This includes
support funded by the trade
associations, industries and
manufacturers of age
restricted products,
including the tobacco
industry. All of the products
that we deal with are highly
controversial – that’s part of
the reason why they are age
restricted – be they alcohol,
gambling, knives, fireworks
or indeed tobacco.
Valley Parade Limited
(Bradford)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Value Newsagents
(Oakengates)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Vanika's Convenience
Store (Preston)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
VDM News (Chorley)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Village News
(Essington)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Village News (South
Wirral)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Village Newsagents
(Cumbernauld)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Village Stores
(Grimsby)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Virks Cut Price
(Wolverhampton)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Wagstaffs (Clactonon-sea)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
73
Walkley News
(Walkley)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Walsall Rd News
(Birmingham)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Walton Stores
(Chesterfield)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Waterloo Stores Retail
Newsagents
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
WDFG UK Ltd (World
Duty Free Group)
Business
Relations and
External Affairs
Director
Tobacco retailer
(other type of
shop or
business)
Weidenhammer
Packaging Group
(WPG)
Chief Executive
Officer
Business
involved in the
design or
manufacture of
packaging
West Bridgford Stores
LTD (Nottingham)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
West Coast Wine
(Stockport)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Westfield Stores
(Yeadon)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Westminster Wines
(Blackpool)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Wharncliffe Side Post
Office (Sheffield)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Whitehouse
Convenience Store
(Lower Walkley)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Wickhams Food and
Wine (Shirley)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Widmer End
Supermarket
Retail
Newsagents
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Wiggleys Corner Store
(Oxford)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
74
Wilkinson's Spar
(Coleraine)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Windmill News (Derby)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Windmill Store
(Lisburn)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Windsor Mini Market
(Sulford)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Winnock Stores
(Colchester)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Worsborough Brige
Post Office (Barnsley)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Wortley Wines &
Spirits (Leeds)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Yafs News (Liverpool)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Yagnik & Co
(Nottingham)
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
YNS News
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
unnanmed business Manager
Tobacco retailer
(convenience
store)
Organisations
Organisation Name Job Title of
Respondent
Type of Business or Sole
Trader
Other type
of business
or sole
trader
"20-20 Voice"
Cancer (Reg No:
1156733)
Chairman Health charity/NGO (working at
national level)
3 Towns Partnership Other (please provide details
below)
Local
authority
and other
agency
partnership
Airport Operators
Association
Other type of business
representative organisation
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
75
AITS (Association of
Independent
Tobacco Specialists)
Retail representative
organisation
Aneurin Bevan
University Health
Board
University or research
organisation
APRAM (Association
of Trade Marks and
Designs rights
Practitioners)
Présidente
APRAM
Other type of business
representative organisation
APRAM –
Association
of Trade
Marks and
Designs
rights
Practitioners
– is an
international
Association
for
Frenchspeaking

specialists
in industrial
and
intellectual
property, in
particular
Trade
Marks and
designs.
The
association,
which now
has more
than 800
members,
was
founded
more than
30 years
ago and is
opened to
all Frenchspeaking

lawyers
practising,
all over the
world, in the
field of
Trade 
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
76
Marks and
designs. It
gathers
together inhouse

intellectual
property
specialists,
Attorneys at
law and
Trade Mark
Attorneys.
The
purpose of
the
association
is notably to
play an
active role
in, and be at
the forefront
of
discussions
concerning
intellectual
property
and
business
law in
France,
Europe and
the world,
further to
consultation
or on its
own
initiative.
Generally
speaking
and based
upon its
previous
submissions
and
statements,
APRAM is
much
concerned 
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
77
about
proposed
legislation
and
measures to
impose
plain
packaging
and its
Property
(IP) like
deprivation
of
Intellectual
Property
Rights
(IPRs) and
diluting the
legal effects
of IPRs and
mainly trade
mark rights
on EU-wide
and national
level within
the EU.
ASH (Action on
Smoking and Health)
Health charity/NGO (working at
national level)
ASH Scotland
(Action on Smoking
and Health)
Director of
Policy and
Engagement
Health charity/NGO (working at
national level)
ASH Wales (Action
on Smoking and
Health)
Health charity/NGO (working at
national level)
ASIPI - InterAmerican

Association of
Intellectual Property
President Other (please provide details
below)
Association of Chief
Trading Standards
Officers (ACTSO)
Chairman Other (please provide details
below)
The
Association
of Chief
Trading
Standards
Officers
(ACTSO) is
the single
membership
organisation
representing 
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
78
senior
Trading
Standards
Managers
from
councils
across
England
and Wales
Association of
Convenience Stores
Retail representative
organisation
Association of
Directors of Public
Health
Local Authority
Association of
Directors of Public
Health, West
Midlands network
Local Authority
Association of North
East Councils
Local Authority
Association of
Respiratory Nurse
Specialists
Nurse
Consultant
Health charity/NGO (working at
national level)
Association of
School and College
Leaders
Public
Affairs
Director
Other (please provide details
below)
Education
membership
organisation
Australasian
Association of
Convenience Stores
(AACS)
Chief
Executive
Officer
Retail representative
organisation
Australian Council on
Smoking and Health
(ACOSH) &
Professor Mike
Daube
Health charity/NGO (working at
national level)
Australian Retailers
Association
Executive
Director
Retail representative
organisation
Barts Health NHS
Trust
Public
Health
Specialty
Registrar
NHS organisation
Bath and North East
Somerset Tobacco
Action Network
Public
Health
Developmen
t and
Commissioni
ng Manager
Local tobacco control alliance
Black Country
Tobacco Control
Alliance
Programme
ManagerTobacco

Local tobacco control alliance
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
79
Control
Blackburn with
Darwen Borough
Council
Local Authority
Blackpool Council,
Director of Public
Health
Director of
Public
Health
Local Authority
Blackpool Teaching
Hospitals NHS
Foundation Trust
Chief
Executive
Local Authority
Bolton Council Health
improvement
specialist
Local Authority
Bristol Health and
Wellbeing Board
Local Authority
British American
Business (BAB) and
the British-American
Business Council
(BABC)
Other type of business
representative organisation
British American
Tobacco (Belgium)
works council
Secretary of
the Works
Council
Other (please provide details
below)
British
American
Tobacco
(Belgium)
works
council
represents
150
employees
in Belgium.
British Dental
Association
Health charity/NGO (working at
national level)
British Heart
Foundation
Health charity/NGO (working at
national level)
British Lung
Foundation
Health charity/NGO (working at
national level)
British Lung
Foundation
(Scotland & Northern
Ireland)
Health charity/NGO (working at
national level)
British Lung
Foundation Wales
Health charity/NGO (working at
national level)
British Medial
Association (BMA)
Policy
Director
Health charity/NGO (working at
national level)
British Thoracic
Society
Health charity/NGO (working at
national level)
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
80
Bury Council/ Bury
Tobacco Alliance
Health
Improvemen
t Specialist
Local Authority
Cambridgeshire
County Council
(Public Health)
Director of
Public
Health
Local Authority Following
the
consultation
opening on
the 26th
June 2014,
the
consultation
and a
summary of
the
available
evidence
were
presented
by Dr Liz
Robin,
Director of
Public
Health, to
Cambridges
hire County
Council’s
Health
Committee
meeting in
public on
the 10th
July 2014.
The Health
Committee
has
delegated
responsibilit
y for
responding
to
consultation
s related to
health and
health
services on
the County
Council’s
behalf.
Following
discussion, 
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
81
the Health
Committee
approved
the attached
consultation
response.
Canadian Cancer
Society
Health charity/NGO (working at
national level)
Canadian
Manufacturers &
Exporters
Other type of business
representative organisation
Cancer Council of
Victoria
Chief
Executive
Officer
Health charity/NGO (working at
national level)
Cancer Focus
Northern Ireland
Health charity/NGO (working at
national level)
Cancer Research UK Health charity/NGO (working at
national level)
CBI Other type of business
representative organisation
Centre for
Economics and
Business Research
University or research
organisation
CENTROMARCA –
ASSOCIAÇÃO
PORTUGUESA DE
EMPRESAS DE
PRODUTOS DE
MARCA
(PORTUGUESE
ASSOCIATION OF
BRANDED
PRODUCTS
MANUFACTURERS)
Executive
Director
Other (please provide details
below)
IPR
Association
CENTROM
ARCA –
ASSOCIAÇ
ÃO
PORTUGU
ESA DE
EMPRESAS
DE
PRODUTO
S DE
MARCA
(PORTUGU
ESE
ASSOCIATI
ON OF
BRANDED
PRODUCT
S
MANUFACT
URERS) -
Founded in
June 1994,
currently 
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
82
gathers 56
members
holding
more than
800 brands
and has an
annual
turnover in
the
domestic
market of
around € 6
000 million.
Its missions
relies on the
promotion
and the
defense of
trademarks
as a means
of
differentiatio
n and a
guarantee
of quality
and
innovation
for the
consumer, a
factor of
competitive
ness,
progress
and wealth
creation for
the
economy
and an
indispensabl
e tool for
promoting
progress for
the society
as a whole.
Cheshire &
Merseyside Tobacco
Alliance (CMTA) Local tobacco control alliance
Cheshire West and
Chester Council
Public Health
Health
Improveme
nt Local Authority
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
83
Practitioner
Advanced:
Sexual
Health and
Smoking
Cessation
Children and Young
People's Board
Lead
Member
Children,
Young
People and
Families Local Authority
City of London
Tobacco Control
Alliance Local tobacco control alliance
City of York Council Local Authority
Community Safety
Partnership
Lead
Member
Area
Manageme
nt &
Community
Safety Local Authority
Confederation of
European
Community Cigarette
Manufacturers
(CECCM)
EU Product
Regulation
Manager
Industry representative
organisation
Confederation of
Industry of the Czech
Republic
Industry representative
organisation
Consumer
Packaging
Manufacturers
Alliance (CPMA) DIRECTOR
Industry representative
organisation
Convenience Store
magazine Editor
Other (please provide details
below)
Trade
publication
involved in
supporting,
representing
and
campaignin
g on behalf
of
independent
convenienc
e store 
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
84
retailers.
Councillor Moncur
chair of Sefton’s
Health and
Wellbeing Board Local Authority
County Durham &
Darlington
Respiratory Network NHS organisation
County Durham
Director of Public
Health
Director of
Public
Health Local Authority
County Durham Stop
Smoking Service
Health
Improveme
nt Manager Local Authority
Coventry Smokefree
Alliance
Tobacco
Control Coordinator
Local tobacco control alliance
Czech Association
for Branded Products
(CSZV)
Executive
Director
Other type of business
representative organisation
Packaging
representati
ve
organisation
Darlington Borough
Council Local Authority
Derby City Council
Cabinet
Member for
Adults and
Health Local Authority
Derbyshire County
Council Local Authority
Derbyshire Health
and Wellbeing Board Local Authority
Derbyshire,
Nottinghamshire and
Leicestershire
Chamber of
Commerce
Head of
Information
and
Representa
tion
Other type of business
representative organisation
Deutscher
Zigarettenverband
(German cigarettes
manufacturers'
association) Secretary
Industry representative
organisation
German
cigarette
manufacture
rs'
association
Devon & Somerset
Trading Standards
Service
Local Authority Trading
Standards or Regulatory Services
Department
Dorset Tobacco
Control Alliance
Head of
Programme
s (Health
Improveme Local tobacco control alliance
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
85
nt)
Dudley Council
(Public Health) Local Authority
Dudley Health &
Wellbeing Board Local Authority
Durham County
Council
Public
Health
Portfolio
Lead Local Authority
Durham County
Council (Public
Health) Local Authority
East and north Herts
NHS Trust Midwife NHS organisation
East Sussex Trading
Standards
Local Authority Trading
Standards or Regulatory Services
Department
ECMA - the
European Carton
Makers Association
Industry representative
organisation
ESTA (European
Smoking Tobacco
Association)
Industry representative
organisation
European Cigar
Manufacturers
Assocation (EMCA)
Secretary
General
Other type of business
representative organisation
European
Communities Trade
Mark Association
(ECTA)
ECTA
Legal
Coordinator
Other (please provide details
below)
ECTA,
which was
formed in
1980, is an
organisation
concerned
primarily
with trade
marks and
designs.
ECTA has
approximate
ly 1,500
members,
coming from
all the
Member
States of
the EU, with
associate
Members 
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
86
from more
than 50
other
countries
throughout
the world.
ECTA
brings
together
those
practising in
the field of
IP, in
particular
trade marks,
designs and
related
matters.
These
professional
s are
lawyers,
trade mark
and patent
attorneys,
in-house
lawyers
concerned
with IP
matters
from many
industries,
and other
specialists
in these
fields.
Members of
ECTA
represent
more than
50% of all
Community
Trademarks
. ECTA
does not
have any
direct or
indirect links
to, and is
not funded 
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
87
by, any
section of
the tobacco
industry.
ECTA is
recognised
by WIPO as
a nonGovernment

Organisatio
n (NGO).
Federação Nacional
de Hotéis,
Restaurantes, Bares
e Similares -
FNHRBS
Other type of business
representative organisation
Federation of the
Food and Drink
Industries of the
Czech Republic/FFDI President
Industry representative
organisation
Federation of
Wholesale
Distributors
Chief
Executive
Other type of business
representative organisation
Wholesale
Trade
Association
Fiona Johnstone,
Director of Public
Health, Wirral
Council Local Authority
FOREST
Other (please provide details
below)
Consumer
representati
ve
organisation
Fresh
Health charity/NGO (working at
national level)
Gateshead Council
Public
Health
programme
lead Local Authority
Gateshead
Smokefree Alliance
Public
Health
Programme
s Lead
Other (please provide details
below)
Gateshead
Smokefree
Alliance (
partnership)
Gateshead, South
Tyneside and
Sunderland NHS
Stop Smoking
Service NHS organisation
German Advertising
Federation (ZAW) Lawyer
Industry representative
organisation
Gravure Association Other type of business 
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
88
of the Americas representative organisation
Greater Manchester
Tobacco Alliance Local tobacco control alliance
Halton Borough
Council/Local
Authority
Tobacco
Control
Coordinator Local Authority
Hartlepool Borough
Council
Chief
Executive Local Authority
Hartlepool Borough
Council
Chief
Executive Local Authority
Hartlepool Borough
Council (Trading
Standards)
Trading
Standards
Technical
Officer
(Tobacco
Control)
Local Authority Trading
Standards or Regulatory Services
Department
The Local
Authority
Trading
Standards
service of
Hartlepool
Borough
Council is at
the forefront
of many
important
tobacco
control
measures.
The service
also works
in
partnership
with
colleagues
in HMRC
and the
Police to
tackle the
trade in illicit
tobacco,
these efforts
have been
successful
in reducing
the sales of
smuggled
and
counterfeit
cigarettes. 
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
89
HealthNet Chair of
HealthNet
Other (please provide details
below)
HealthNet is
a collective
voice
representing
the people
of South
Tyneside to
debate,
influence
and shape
local health
and
wellbeing
policies and
services.
Heart of Mersey NHS organisation
HELLENIC
ASSOCIATION OF
COMMUNICATIONS
AGENCIES (HACA)
MEMBER
OF THE
IMC
COMMITT
EE
Other type of business
representative organisation
HELLENIC INTERPROGESSIONAL

ORGANISATION OF
RAW TOBACCO
PRESIDEN
T OF THE
BOARD OF
DIRECTOR
S
Other type of business
representative organisation
Interprofessional

Organisatio
n founded
on the basis
of EU
legislation.
Hertfordshire County
Council
Local Authority
Hull Alliance on
Tobacco (HALT)
Local tobacco control alliance
Hywel Dda University
Health Board
University or research
organisation
Importers and
Exporters
Association of Taipei
(IEAT)
Secretary
General
Other type of business
representative organisation
INDICAM Director Industry representative
organisation
Institute of Economic
Affairs (IEA)
Director of
Lifestyle
Economics
University or research
organisation
Institute of Trade
Mark Attorneys
(ITMA)
Other type of business
representative organisation
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
90
International
Chamber of
Commerce -
(Business Action to
Stop Counterfeiting
and Piracy
(BASCAP)
Director of
BASCAP
Other type of business
representative organisation
International
Chamber of
Commerce UK (ICC
UK)
Other type of business
representative organisation
International
Trademark
Association
Policy
Officer,
Europe
Other (please provide details
below)
The
International
Trademark
Association
(INTA) is a
global
association
of trade
mark
owners and
professional
s dedicated
to
supporting
trade marks
and related
intellectual
property
rights (IPRs)
in order to
protect
consumers
and to
promote fair
and
effective
commerce.
International
Trademark
Association (INTA)
Other type of business
representative organisation
Irish Cancer Society Advocacy
Officer
Health charity/NGO (working at
national level)
Islington Trading
Standards
Local Authority Trading
Standards or Regulatory Services
Department
ITPAC - The
Imported Tobacco
Products Advisory
SecretaryGeneral
Other type of business
representative organisation
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
91
Council
KEIDANREN - Japan
Business Federation
Internation
al Affairs
Bureau
Industry representative
organisation
Kent County Council Local Authority
Kirklees Council
(Public Health)
Local Authority
Lambeth and
Southwark Tobacco
Alliance
Public
Health
Officer
Local tobacco control alliance
Lancashire County
Council
Cabinet
Member for
Health and
Wellbeing
Local Authority
Leeds Tobacco
Control Management
Group
Local tobacco control alliance
Leicester City
Council
Deputy City
Mayor
Local Authority
Lithuanian
Confederation of
Industrialists (LPK)
Representa
tive in
Brussels
Industry representative
organisation
Liverpool & Sefton
Chambers of
Commerce
Chief
Executive
Other type of business
representative organisation
Chambers
of
Commerce
Liverpool Trading
Standards
Local Authority Trading
Standards or Regulatory Services
Department
London Borough of
Barking and
Dagenham
Local Authority
London Borough of
Enfield
Local Authority
London Borough of
Hackney
Director of
Public
Health
Local Authority
London Boroughs of
Camden and
Islington’s Joint
Department of Public
Health
Local Authority
Making Smoking
History in the North
East
Local tobacco control alliance
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
92
Manchester Airports
Group
Head of
Public
Affairs
Other (please provide details
below)
Airport
operator
with on-site
retailers
selling
tobacco
products.
Markenverband
(German Brands
Association)
Director
Legal
Industry representative
organisation
Medway Council Local Authority
Medway Tobacco
Control Alliance
Tobacco
Control
Programme
Manager
Local tobacco control alliance
Middlesbrough
Council
Environme
ntal Health
Manager
Local Authority
Middlesbrough
Tobacco Control
Alliance
Public
Health
Officer(Tob
acco
Control
Alliance
Lead)
Local tobacco control alliance
Milton Keynes
Council
Local Authority
National Asian
Business Association
(NABA)
Other type of business
representative organisation
National Children's
Bureau
Policy
Officer
Health charity/NGO (working at
national level)
National Federation
of Retail Newsagents
(NFRN)
Retail representative
organisation
National Foreign
Trade Council
Other type of business
representative organisation
Newcastle City
Council
Public
Health
Specialist /
Commissio
ner
Local Authority
Local
Authority
Newcastle Upon
Tyne hospitals
Foundation Trust
NHS organisation
NHS Grampian NHS organisation
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
93
NHS Health Scotland Health charity/NGO (working at
national level)
Nisa Retail Ltd Business
Manager
Wholesale tobacco seller
Norfolk County
Council (Public
Health)
Local Authority
North East Public
Protection
Partnership
Other (please provide details
below)
North East Trading
Standards
Association (NETSA)
Chair Local Authority Trading
Standards or Regulatory Services
Department
The North
East
Trading
Standards
Association,
NETSA, is a
partnership
body
representing
the following
Local
Authority
Trading
Standards
Services
(LATSS) in
the North
East of
England:
Darlington,
Durham,
Gateshead,
Hartlepool,
Middlesbrou
gh,
Newcastleupon-Tyne,

North
Tyneside,
Northumberl
and, Redcar
and
Cleveland,
South
Tyneside,
Stockton on
Tees and
Sunderland
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
94
North Tyneside
Council
Local Authority
Northumberland
County Council
Trading Standards
Trading
Standards
Manager -
Urban
Local Authority Trading
Standards or Regulatory Services
Department
Northumbria Police Chief
Superinten
dent
Other (please provide details
below)
Northumbria
Police as
part of a
Community
Safety
Partnership
Nottinghamshire
Strategic Tobacco
Alliance Group
(STAG)
Public
Health
Manager
Local tobacco control alliance
Oxfordshire County
Council (Public
Health)
Local Authority
Plymouth City
Council
Director of
Public
Health
Local Authority
Plymouth City
Council
Local Authority
PROMARCA President /
Managing
Director
Other type of business
representative organisation
Property Rights
Alliance
Other type of business
representative organisation
Public Health -
Thurrock Council
Health
Improveme
nt Officer
Local Authority
Public Health
Agency Northern
Ireland
Health charity/NGO (working at
national level)
Public Health Dorset Head of
Programme
s (Health
Improveme
nt)
Local Authority
Public Health
England (PHE)
Other (please provide details
below)
RMI Petrol Retailers
Association
Retail representative
organisation
ROCHDALE
BOROUGH HEALTH
AND WELLBEING
BOARD
CHAIR OF
ROCHDAL
E
BOROUGH
HEALTH
Local Authority
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
95
AND
WELLBEIN
G BOARD
Rotherham Public
Health
Public
Health
Principal
(Health
Improveme
nt)
Local tobacco control alliance
Royal Borough of
Greenwich (Trading
Standards)
Local Authority Trading
Standards or Regulatory Services
Department
Royal College of
Midwives
Health charity/NGO (working at
national level)
Royal College of
Nursing
Health charity/NGO (working at
national level)
Royal College of
Physicians
Health charity/NGO (working at
national level)
Royal College of
Physicians of
Edinburgh
Health charity/NGO (working at
national level)
Rural Shops Alliance Retail representative
organisation
Saarland University University or research
organisation
Salford Trading
Standards
Cabinet
Member for
Health and
Wellbeing
& Cabinet
Member for
Housing
and
Environme
nt
Local Authority Trading
Standards or Regulatory Services
Department
Sandwell
Metropolitan
Borough Council
Local Authority
SCOT (Scottish
Coalition On
Tobacco)
Director of
Policy and
Engageme
nt, ASH
Scotland
Other (please provide details
below)
SCOT - the
Scottish
Coalition on
Tobacco - is
a
campaignin
g coalition
of 13 health
and medical 
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
96
organisation
s that have
a shared
interest in
matters
relating to
tobacco and
health.
Scottish Directors of
Public Health
Health charity/NGO (working at
national level)
Scottish Grocers
Federation
Retail representative
organisation
Scottish Wholesale
Association
Retail representative
organisation
Sheffield Tobacco
Control Programme
Accountable Board
Local Authority
Shropshire Council Public
Health
Officer
Local Authority
Smoke Free
Hartlepool Alliance
Local tobacco control alliance
Smoke Free
Newcastle
Senior
Health
Improveme
nt
Specialist
Local tobacco control alliance
Smoke Free
Northumberland
Alliance
Local tobacco control alliance
Smoke Free
Stockton Alliance
Responsibil
ity of
Health and
Wellbeing
of Stockton
Borough
Council &
Health
Improveme
nt
Specialist /
Local
Tobacco
Control
Lead
Local tobacco control alliance
Smokefree Bristol
Alliance on behalf of
Bristol City Counci
Local tobacco control alliance
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
97
Smokefree Devon
Alliance
Public
Health
Programme
Manager
Local tobacco control alliance
Smokefree Redcar &
Cleveland Alliance
Health
Improveme
nt
Commissio
ning Lead
Local Authority
Smokefree South
West
Director Other (please provide details
below)
Collaborativ
ely
commission
ed regional
tobacco
control
programme.
Somerset County
Council
Local Authority
South
Gloucestershire
Council
Specialist
Health
Improveme
nt
Practitioner
Local Authority
South Tyneside
Homes
Managing
Director of
South
Tyneside
Homes
Other (please provide details
below)
South
Tyneside
Council's
Housing
Company
South Tyneside
Tobacco Alliance
Director of
Public
Health
Local tobacco control alliance
Stockport Council
and Stockport
Clinical
Commissioning
Group
NHS organisation
Stoke on Trent
Public Health
Senior
Health
Improveme
nt
SpecialistLong
Term
Conditions
Local Authority
Sunderland City
Council
Director of
Public
Health
Local Authority
Sunderland Health
and Wellbeing Board
Policy Lead
for Health
Other (please provide details
below)
Sunderland
Health and
Wellbeing 
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
98
Board
response to
the
consultation
on the
introduction
of
regulations
for
standardise
d packaging
of tobacco
products.
We are a
multi
agency
partnership
chaired by
the leader of
Sunderland
City
Council, Cllr
Paul
Watson.
Sunderland Tobacco
Alliance
Public
Health
Lead
Local tobacco control alliance
Swindon Smoke
Free Alliance
Local tobacco control alliance
Swindon Smokefree
Alliance
Health
Promotion
Officer,
Public
Protection
Local tobacco control alliance Response
from
Swindon
Borough
Council -
Swindon
Smokefree
Alliance is a
partnership
of
organisation
s who work
together to
drive down
smoking
prevalence
and the
associate
harm and
inequalities
in health it 
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
99
causes in
Swindon.
Partners
include
Swindon
Borough
Council,
Trading
Standards,
Community
Safety
Partnership,
Public
Health,
Licensing,
Healthy
Schools,
Great
Western
Hospital
NHS
Foundation
Trust,
Wiltshire
and
Swindon
Fire
Service,
Swindon
Stop
Smoking
Service
provided by
Seqol and
community
representati
ves.
This
response on
behalf of
Swindon
Smokefree
Alliance is in
line with and
in full
support of
the Action
on Smoking
and Health 
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
100
(ASH)
response.
Tameside Tobacco
Alliance
Public
Health
Programme
Manager
Local tobacco control alliance
TaxPayers' Alliance Other (please provide details
below)
Tenovus Chief
Executive
Officer
Health charity/NGO (working at
national level)
The AntiCounterfeiting
Group
and British Brands
Group
Other type of business
representative organisation
The Business
Alliance of Slovakia
Executive
Director
Industry representative
organisation
The Centre for
Transnational
Accountability (CTA)
Executive
Director
Other (please provide details
below)
Not-forprofit

organization
that
counters
illicit trade
worldwide
The Institute of
Public Health in
Ireland
Public
Health
Developme
nt Officer
(Policy)
Health charity/NGO (working at
national level)
The Law Society of
Scotland
Other (please provide details
below)
The Lords and
Commons Cigar
Club
Convenor Other organisation (please
provide details below)
The Royal College of
Anaesthetists
Chief
Executive
Health charity/NGO (working at
national level)
The Royal College of
Radiologists (RCR)
President Health charity/NGO (working at
national level)
The Young Britons'
Foundation
Other (please provide details
below)
Tobacco Free
Futures
Health charity/NGO (working at
national level)
Tobacco Free Luton Local tobacco control alliance
Tobacco
Manufactures
Association of
Industry representative
organisation
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
101
Denmark
Tobacco Retailers’
Alliance
Local tobacco control alliance
Trade related IPR
Protection
Association (TIPA)
Executive
Vice
Chairman
Other type of business
representative organisation
IP
Protection
for Korean
businesses
Trading Standards
and Public Health on
behalf of Hampshire
County Council
Local Authority
Trading Standards
Institute
Other (please provide details
below)
Trading Standards
North West
Coordinator
Other (please provide details
below)
Trading
Standards
North West
(TSNW) is a
partnership
of Trading
Standards
Services in
23 Local
Authorities,
working to
provide a
safe,
healthy and
fair
environment
for over 7
million
consumers
across the
North West
of England
Trans-Atlantic
Business Council
Other type of business
representative organisation
U.S. Chamber of
Commerce
Other type of business
representative organisation
UK Centre for
Tobacco and Alcohol
Studies
Professor University or research
organisation
UK Health Forum Health charity/NGO (working at
national level)
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
102
UK Travel Retail
Forum
Secretary
General
Retail representative organisation
Unindustria President Industry representative
organisation
UNION OF
TOBACCONISTS,
RENTAL STANDS,
SELLERS OF
HABERDASHERY
PRODUCTS AND
PACKAGED
CONFECTIONERY
SPECIES OF
MAKEDONIA
PRESIDEN
T
Retail representative organisation
Unite (The Union) Other (please provide details
below) Trade Union
Verband der
deutschen
Rauchtabakindustrie
e.V. / German
Smoking Tobacco
Association
Managing
Director
Other type of business
representative organisation
VNO-NCW policy
advisor
Other type of business
representative organisation
VNO-NCW
is the
Confederati
on of Dutch
Industry and
Employers
WAG Welsh Dental
Committee
Professor/
Consultant
Oral
Surgeon
NHS organisation
Warrington Borough
Council
Local Authority
Warrington Council Local Authority
Warwickshire County
Council
Director of
Public
Health
Local Authority
Welsh Medical
Committee
Health charity/NGO (working at
national level)
Wigan & Leigh
Tobacco Control
Alliance
Local tobacco control alliance
Wiltshire Council Local Authority
Consultation – introduction of regulations for standardised packaging of tobacco products: Summary report
103
Wolverhampton City
Council (Public
Health)
Local Authority