Laws/Policies
Federal Laws and Policies
About Tobacco Laws and Regulations
About Tobacco Marketing Policies
State and Local Laws
Federal Laws and Policies
Tobacco control laws and other government policies aim to: 

Prevent people, particularly children and youth, from starting to use tobacco
Help people quit using tobacco products
Reduce the harmful effects caused by tobacco use
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Regulation to Protect Public Health

Click this image for a full-size version of the FDA Regulation to Protect Public Health

View FDA’s infographic to learn about the milestones in their work on:

Regulating tobacco
Protecting kids from buying tobacco
Assessing the behavioral and health impact of tobacco regulation
Back to top
About Tobacco Laws and Regulations
Why is tobacco control important?

Tobacco control programs aim to reduce disease, disability, and death related to tobacco use. A comprehensive approach—one that includes educational, clinical, regulatory, economic, and social strategies—has been established as the best way to eliminate the negative health and economic effects of tobacco use.

What is the difference between a law and a regulation?

Federal laws, like the Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control Act (Tobacco Control Act), are passed by Congress and signed by the president. These laws are usually enforced through executive branch agencies, such as the Food and Drug Administration (FDA).

Laws can also be enacted at the state and local level to protect public health and make tobacco products less affordable, less accessible, and less attractive. For example, states may pass smoke-free indoor air laws and cigarette price increases, which have been proven to reduce cigarette use, prevent youth from starting to smoke, and encourage people to try to quit.

The executive branch, when authorized by Congress, enacts Federal regulations. States can also introduce regulations. Most regulations are developed by a government agency with public input. For example, FDA issues tobacco-related regulations under authority provided by the Tobacco Control Act through a notice and comment rulemaking process. This process allows for public input before FDA issues the final regulation. Learn more about regulations.

Why does the government ask for public input on regulatory issues?

Federal agencies request public input to help create the most effective policies and strategies to improve public health. Public participation is important when agencies:

Publish proposed regulations
Issue draft and final guidance documents (documents that, when finalized, represent an agency’s current thinking on a topic)
Conduct public meetings and hearings
Open public dockets to solicit information on specific issues
See www.regulations.gov for more information:

Regulations.gov Fact Sheet (PDF - 202KB), Help, and FAQs
FDA’s Center for Tobacco Products Fact Sheet (PDF - 226KB)
Highlights of Federal Tobacco Control Efforts

1964 - First Report of the Surgeon General’s Advisory Committee on Smoking and Health

Identifies smoking as a cause of increased mortality.
1965 – Federal Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act

Requires a health warning on cigarette packages.
Requires Federal Trade Commission to submit annual report to Congress on tobacco industry advertising and labeling practices.
Requires Department of Health, Education, and Welfare to submit annual report to Congress on health consequences of smoking.
1970 – Public Health Cigarette Smoking Act

Requires a health warning on cigarette packages.
Prohibits cigarette advertising on television and radio.
1984 – Comprehensive Smoking Education Act

Institutes use of four rotating health warning labels, all listed as Surgeon General’s Warnings, on cigarette packages and advertisements.
1986 – Comprehensive Smokeless Tobacco Health Education Act

Institutes use of three rotating health warning labels on smokeless tobacco packages and advertisements.
Prohibits smokeless tobacco advertising on television and radio.
Requires Department of Health and Human Services to publish a report every two years to Congress on smokeless tobacco.
Requires Federal Trade Commission to report annually to Congress on smokeless tobacco sales, advertising, and marketing.
Requires smokeless industry to submit confidential list of additives and nicotine content in smokeless tobacco products. 
1988 – Amendment to Federal Aviation Act

Makes domestic flights of two hours or less smoke-free.
1992 – Synar Amendment to the Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration Reorganization Act requires states to:

Enact laws prohibiting the sale and distribution of tobacco products to minors
Enforce these laws in a way that can reasonably be expected to reduce the availability of tobacco products to youth under the age of 18
Conduct random, unannounced inspections of tobacco outlets
Report annual findings to the Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services
1996 – Regulations Restricting the Sale and Distribution of Cigarettes and Smokeless Tobacco to Protect Children and Adolescents

Asserts jurisdiction over tobacco products, issuing this final rule restricting the sale and distribution of cigarettes and smokeless tobacco to protect youth. (In 2000, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that FDA did not have the authority to regulate tobacco and that such regulation required authorization by Congress.)
2000 – Wendell H. Ford Aviation Investment and Reform Act

Prohibits smoking on all flights between the United States and foreign destinations.
2009 – Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control Act (Tobacco Control Act) – Some parts of this law, and FDA regulations authorized by it, are currently subject to litigation, making the implementation of these provisions uncertain.

Grants FDA the authority to regulate the manufacture, distribution, and marketing of tobacco products
Requires prominent graphic warning labels for cigarettes and larger text warnings for smokeless tobacco products
Prohibits the advertising or labeling of tobacco products with the descriptors “light,” “low,” “mild,” or similar descriptors without an FDA order.
Requires tobacco companies to submit research on health, toxicological, behavioral, or physiologic effects of tobacco use. 
Allows FDA to conduct compliance check inspections of tobacco retailers. Penalties for violations include fines, and, for repeated violations, a potential no-tobacco sale order prohibiting the sale of tobacco products.
Prohibits the sale of cigarettes containing certain characterizing flavors (such as strawberry, grape, orange, and other flavors).
Requires tobacco manufacturers to get an order or exemption from FDA before they may introduce new tobacco products.
Portions of this law are currently subject to litigation.

Timeline: Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control Act



View an accessible version of this infographic.

Read FDA’s Overview of the Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control Act: Consumer Fact Sheet for more information.

2010 – Prevent All Cigarette Trafficking (PACT) Act – Some parts of this law are currently subject to litigation.

Prohibits the mailing of cigarettes (including roll-your-own tobacco) and smokeless tobacco through the U.S. Postal Service.
Requires internet and mail-order sales retailers to comply with age verification requirements.
Among other things, requires internet and other mail-order retailers to pay appropriate federal, state, local, and tribal taxes for cigarettes (including roll-your-own tobacco) and smokeless tobacco.
Learn more about U.S. Government actions regarding the regulation of tobacco sales, marketing, and use.

Back to top
About Tobacco Marketing Laws and Policies
There are several federal laws, federal regulations, and legal agreements that govern the advertising and marketing of tobacco products, some of which are listed below. State and local governments may have additional requirements that apply to the advertising and promotion of tobacco products.

1998 – Master Settlement Agreement Site exit disclaimer

The Attorneys General of 46 states and the District of Columbia signed the Master Settlement Agreement (MSA) with the four largest tobacco companies in the United States. (The other four states had already reached separate agreements with the tobacco companies). Since the agreement was signed, about 40 other tobacco companies have signed on and are also bound by its terms.

According to the MSA, participating tobacco companies are bound by the following:

Agreement to pay the states billions of dollars annually to compensate for tobacco-related health care costs.
Limitations on advertising, marketing, and promotion of cigarettes.
Prohibition on tobacco advertising that targets people younger than 18, including the use of cartoons.
Limitations on outdoor, billboard, and public transit advertising.
Prohibition on the use of cigarette brand names on other products.
Providing tobacco company internal documents to the public.
Generally, the terms of the MSA mean that participating states may not bring other related legal claims against the tobacco companies.

2009 – Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control Act

Several parts of the Tobacco Control Act restrict tobacco product advertising and marketing to youth by directing FDA to issue regulations, including:

Limiting the color and design of packaging and advertisements
Prohibiting tobacco product sponsorship of sporting, entertainment, or other cultural events under the brand name of cigarettes or smokeless tobacco
Prohibiting free samples of cigarettes and restricting free sampling of smokeless tobacco
Prohibiting cigarette and smokeless tobacco brand names on non-tobacco items
Portions of this law are currently subject to litigation.

Back to top
State and Local Laws
There are many state and local laws and regulations that apply to tobacco products. For example, states have:

Implemented smoke-free air laws, which prohibit smoking in public places and workplaces.
Increased tobacco excise taxes, which increase the purchase price of tobacco products.
Ensured Medicaid covers treatment of tobacco use, which increases quit attempts by improving access and affordability of effective cessation strategies.
Enacted prohibitions on the sale of flavored tobacco products.
State-Based Tobacco Control Programs

It is of particular importance that states create comprehensive, sustainable tobacco prevention and control programs. There are many resources available that explain how to plan and establish effective tobacco control programs to prevent and reduce tobacco use. There are also resources that explain approaches taken by state, local, territorial, and tribal governments.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Best Practices for Comprehensive Tobacco Control Programs - This evidence-based guide helps states plan and establish effective tobacco control programs to prevent and reduce tobacco use. It also recommends the amount of money each state should spend to reduce tobacco use. In addition, it presents best practices for:
State and community level interventions
Health communications and quitting strategies
Information about surveillance, evaluation, administration, and management
CDC’s National Tobacco Control Program (NTCP) - Created in 1999 to encourage coordinated, national efforts to reduce tobacco-related diseases and deaths, NTCP provides funding and technical support to state, territorial, and tribal health departments.
CDC’s Community Transformation Grants (CTG) - CTG supports community-level efforts to reduce chronic diseases such as heart disease, cancer, stroke, and diabetes. 
National Networks for Tobacco Control and Prevention - Eight networks, funded by CDC’s Office on Smoking and Health, work together with the NTCP, Network members, partners, states, and other local and national tobacco control organizations to advance the science and practice of tobacco control in the United States. Each Network targets specific subgroups with high rates of tobacco use. The National Networks include:
Geographic Health Equity Alliance Site exit disclaimer
LGBT HealthLink Site exit disclaimer
National African American Tobacco Prevention Network Site exit disclaimer
National Behavioral Health Network for Tobacco and Cancer Control Site exit disclaimer
National Native Network Site exit disclaimer
Nuestras Voces Network Site exit disclaimer
RAISE Network (Reaching Asian Americans Pacific Islanders through Innovative Strategies to Achieve Equity in Tobacco Control and Cancer Prevention) Site exit disclaimer
SelfMade Health Network Site exit disclaimer
Resources to Track State-Level Legislation

State Tobacco Activities Tracking and Evaluation (STATE) System - The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s STATE displays current and historical state-level data on tobacco use prevention and control.
Board of Health Tobacco Control Policy Repository Site exit disclaimer - This National Association of Local Boards of Health repository provides local-level polices on:
Smoke-free air
Tobacco sales/sales to minors
Smoke-free housing
Vending machines/self-service
Hookahs
Electronic cigarettes (e-cigs)
Smokeless tobacco
Interactive Tobacco Map Provides Latest Data on State Smoking Laws Site exit disclaimer - The Robert Wood Johnson Foundation map provides a nationwide picture of state efforts on key tobacco control policies.
Smokefree Lists, Maps, and Data Site exit disclaimer - These resources from Americans for NonSmokers’ Rights provide a comprehensive review of state and local laws covering:
Smoke-free air laws
Restrictions on youth access to tobacco
Tobacco advertising and promotion restrictions
Tobacco excise taxes
Conditional use permits
Smoke-Free State and Local Campaigns Site exit disclaimer - This American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network map provides information on each state’s smoke-free air law.
Tobacco Control Legal Consortium Site exit disclaimer - This Public Health Law Center at William Mitchell College of Law consortium provides legislative drafting and policy assistance to community leaders and public health organizations.
Tobacco Policy Project/State Legislated Actions on Tobacco Issues (SLATI) Site exit disclaimer - The American Lung Association’s SLATI tracks state tobacco control laws, including smoke-free air laws and tobacco taxes.
U.S. State and Local Issues State Tobacco Taxes Site exit disclaimer - The Campaign for Tobacco-Free Kids provides links to key U.S. state and local issues regarding state tobacco taxes.
Back to top

U.S. Department of Health & Human Services |  200 Independence Avenue S.W. |  Washington DC 20201
