Drugs-Forum  
HomeWikiStudiesForumGroupsBlogVideoImagesNewsChat
Go Back	 	Drugs Forum > VARIOUS DRUG RELATED TOPICS > Drug News > Health
Reload this Page Shisha smoking as bad as cigarettes for lungs
User Name	
User Name
Remember Me?
Password	
Log in
Register	Tags	Help  

Notices
Dear Drugs-Forum readers: We are a small non-profit that runs one of the most read drug information & addiction help websites in the world. We serve over 3 million readers per month, and have costs like all popular websites: servers, hosting, licenses and software. To protect our independence we do not run ads. We take no government funds. We run on donations which average $25. If everyone reading this would donate $5 then this fund raiser would be done in an hour. If Drugs-Forum is useful to you, take one minute to keep it online another year by donating whatever you can today. Donations are currently not sufficient to pay our bills and keep the site up. Your help is most welcome. Thank you.
PLEASE HELP
  

Health News about drug research, treatment, and health issues.

 
 
Thread Tools  
  #1  
Old 02-09-2012, 21:22
	
Rob Cypher  Rob Cypher is offline
Banned
 	
Join Date: 30-05-2010
Male from United States
Posts: 2,331
Rob Cypher must mainline MedlineRob Cypher must mainline MedlineRob Cypher must mainline MedlineRob Cypher must mainline MedlineRob Cypher must mainline MedlineRob Cypher must mainline MedlineRob Cypher must mainline MedlineRob Cypher must mainline MedlineRob Cypher must mainline MedlineRob Cypher must mainline MedlineRob Cypher must mainline Medline
Points: 6,290, Level: 11	Points: 6,290, Level: 11	Points: 6,290, Level: 11
Activity: 0%		Activity: 0%		Activity: 0%
Shisha smoking as bad as cigarettes for lungs
Water-pipe smoking is as bad as deeply inhaling cigarette smoke when it comes to causing respiratory problems, according to a study published on Aug. 30.

Researchers led by Mohammad Hossein Boskabady at Masshad University of Medical Sciences in Iran monitored lung functions among 57 local water-pipe smokers, 30 deep-inhalation cigarette smokers and 51 normal-inhalation smokers.

They also studied 44 non-smokers for a comparison.

Wheezing occurred among 23 percent of the water-pipe users, 30 percent of the deep-inhalation and 21.6 percent of normal-inhalation cigarette smokers, but only among 9.1 percent of non-smokers.

Coughing occurred among 21 percent, 36.7 percent and 19.6 percent of the smoking groups, compared with 6.8 percent of non-smokers, according to the probe, which measured smokers over three months in two consecutive years.

Sputum production, meanwhile, was found in 14 percent, 10 percent, 3.9 per cent respectively among the various smoking groups, but among 6.8 percent of the non-smoking group.

The results, published in the peer-reviewed journal Respirology, adds a further scientific blow to the defenders of shisha who claim that water pipes are safer because they filter out tobacco toxins.

The water pipe, often used with sweet or fruit-flavored tobacco, is a centuries-old tradition in the Middle East but in recent years has become fashionable among young westerners, particularly women.

"Our findings reveal that there were profound effects of water-pipe smoking on lung function values, which were similar to the effects observed in deep-inhalation cigarette smokers," Boskabady said in a press release.

"Normal" inhalation cigarette smoking had less of an effect compared to the water pipe, but still contributed significantly to respiratory disorders, the paper stressed.

According to a 2005 study by the UN World Health Organization (WHO), water pipe smoke has high concentrations of toxic compounds, including carbon monoxide, heavy metals, cancer-causing chemicals and potentially addictive levels of nicotine.

Cigarette smokers typically take eight to 12 puffs over five to seven minutes, inhaling a total of 0.5 to 0.6 of a liter of smoke.

In contrast, waterpipe sessions typically last 20-80 minutes, during which the smoker may take 50-20 puffs which each range from 0.15 to one liter each.

"The waterpipe smoker may therefore inhale as much smoke during one session as a cigarette smoker would inhale consuming 100 or more cigarettes," the WHO said.

The Iranian research used a gadget called a spirometer to measure how deeply smokers inhaled and retained the puff.

"Normal" inhalers typically inhaled less than 10 percent above a benchmark of lung inflation called tidal volume. For "deep" inhalers, it was typically more than 30 percent, and for water-pipe smokers it was usually 40 percent above tidal volume.

Agence France-Presse 
30th August 2012
http://www.mnn.com/health/fitness-we...ttes-for-lungs

Post Quality Reviews:
Interesting article. Thanks for sharing.
Attached Images
File Type: jpg	ShishaSmoking_m_0831b.jpg (23.5 KB, 281 views)
Last edited by Phenoxide; 03-09-2012 at 02:10. Reason: news forum format

  #2  
Old 02-09-2012, 22:07
	
profesor  profesor is offline
Silver Member
 	
Join Date: 18-06-2012
46 y/o Male from USA - Colorado
Posts: 843
Blog Entries: 1
profesor really adds to the discussion.profesor really adds to the discussion.profesor really adds to the discussion.profesor really adds to the discussion.profesor really adds to the discussion.profesor really adds to the discussion.
Points: 135, Level: 1	Points: 135, Level: 1	Points: 135, Level: 1
Activity: 0%		Activity: 0%		Activity: 0%
Re: Shisha (hookah aka "waterpipe") smoking as bad as cigarettes for lungs
Wheezing, Coughing and sputum production do not equal "as bad as cigarettes." If a study doesn't include at least emphysema, heart disease, and most importantly, cancer-- actually forget all that- 
Addiction. If shisha isn't as addictive as cigarettes, than I don't consider it as harmful, period. Personally, I'm lucky enough to be the type who can have a boozy night of cigarettes once in a while and then go without, yet still: after about 15-20, I'm hooked again and going to buy another pack.

  #3  
Old 02-09-2012, 23:19
	
Alien Sex Fiend  Alien Sex Fiend is offline
Silver Member
 	
Join Date: 17-04-2012
Male from Canada
Posts: 4,428
Blog Entries: 3
Alien Sex Fiend really knows their shit.Alien Sex Fiend really knows their shit.Alien Sex Fiend really knows their shit.Alien Sex Fiend really knows their shit.Alien Sex Fiend really knows their shit.Alien Sex Fiend really knows their shit.Alien Sex Fiend really knows their shit.Alien Sex Fiend really knows their shit.Alien Sex Fiend really knows their shit.Alien Sex Fiend really knows their shit.
Points: 3,342, Level: 8	Points: 3,342, Level: 8	Points: 3,342, Level: 8
Activity: 0%		Activity: 0%		Activity: 0%
Re: Shisha (hookah aka "waterpipe") smoking as bad as cigarettes for lungs
hookah is not aka "waterpipe". in most of western places a waterpipe is a bong. a hookah is a bong that allows to smoke a smaller amount longer time by producing more smoke and making thus making effects of product smoked less potent and more prolong over time.. think of a regular bong like a crackpipe with water, for short big hits.

this is coming from a seasoned hookah smoker - WARNING: NO A HOOKAH IS IN NO WAY BETTER THAN OTHER PRODUCTS.(SAFEST WAY TO ENJOY TOBACCO IS SNORTING IT, REMEMBER the good ol'17TH Century?)

1. hookah is meant to make more smoke(chilled smoke too, but you are still inhaling more smoke ) from the same amount. think of that. thats actually bad for you.
2. one 90min session of mild shisha = 5-7cigarettes.
3. old studies that showed that hookah is almost harmless were wrong. this has a lot to do with when shisha coffee shops began to be popular in uk. the warning to young ones lol was already sent out from df long ago, that a hookah is not safer.

hookah is safer than a sherlock pipe or a cigar. it cools down the smoke, filtrates it a bit(mainly from large chunks of ash but not the cancer-causing chemicals) and gives one less dizziness in case of tobacco. thats all it does.

if one smokes 4 cigarettes a day, this is actually much much safer for you.(than a load of thinner smoke over one hour, because this is how much smoke the shisha flavor will produce from the equal amount of tobacco in the flavor)

you also inhale other things they put in the flavor like honey, organic flavoring, fake non-organic flavoring and etc and you are using foil for a hitting element(this has something to do with Alzheimer's). 

"The waterpipe smoker may therefore inhale as much smoke during one session as a cigarette smoker would inhale consuming 100 or more cigarettes," the WHO said.*

This is incorrect and bullshit.

did you know that in one hour of a shisha session a person inhales up to 200times? of course if he was smoking cigarettes for one hour, hitting 200times(thats how many cigarettes? 25-30-35?) this person will be already dead from tobacco poisoning. 

*this person is using about the 4-5 cigarettes amount of tobacco over one hour of a shisha session.
this person is inhaling a buttload of cool smoke, which is not good for you.

so one hour of hookah is as safe as smoking 4regulat strength cigarettes, this is approx.



Read more: https://drugs-forum.com/forum/sho...#ixzz25Lu2lFWW

  #4  
Old 03-09-2012, 01:37
	
profesor  profesor is offline
Silver Member
 	
Join Date: 18-06-2012
46 y/o Male from USA - Colorado
Posts: 843
Blog Entries: 1
profesor really adds to the discussion.profesor really adds to the discussion.profesor really adds to the discussion.profesor really adds to the discussion.profesor really adds to the discussion.profesor really adds to the discussion.
Points: 135, Level: 1	Points: 135, Level: 1	Points: 135, Level: 1
Activity: 0%		Activity: 0%		Activity: 0%
Re: Shisha (hookah aka "waterpipe") smoking as bad as cigarettes for lungs
Quote:
Originally Posted by WarmCoCo  View Post
you also inhale other things they put in the flavor like honey, organic flavoring, fake non-organic flavoring and etc and you are using foil for a hitting element(this has something to do with Alzheimer's).
You are correct about many of the hazards of sheesha from a hookah, but I think you are underestimating cigarettes. 
"Adding ammonia to cigarettes allows nicotine in its vapor form to be absorbed through the lungs more quickly. This, in turn, means your brain can get a higher dose of nicotine with each inhalation. Now that’s efficiency. For a start, here’s the who’s who of the most toxic ingredients used to make cigarettes tastier, and more quickly, effectively addictive:
Ammonia: Household cleaner.
Arsenic: Used in rat poisons.
Benzene: Used in making dyes, synthetic rubber.
Butane: Gas; used in lighter fluid.
Carbon monoxide: Poisonous gas.
Cadmium: Used in batteries.
Cyanide: Lethal poison.
DDT: A banned insecticide.
Ethyl Furoate: Causes liver damage in animals.
Lead: Poisonous in high doses.
Formaldehyde: Used to preserve dead specimens.
Methoprene: Insecticide.
Maltitol: Sweetener for diabetics.
Napthalene: Ingredient in mothballs.
Methyl isocyanate: Its accidental release killed 2000 people in Bhopal, India, in 1984.
Polonium: Cancer-causing radioactive element

Read more: http://www.care2.com/greenliving/the...#ixzz25MWJKSue"

Perhaps rollies are much better for you? I don't know how loose smoking tobacco compares to brand name cigarettes- but cigarettes are the devil.

  #5  
Old 03-09-2012, 02:02
	
Alien Sex Fiend  Alien Sex Fiend is offline
Silver Member
 	
Join Date: 17-04-2012
Male from Canada
Posts: 4,428
Blog Entries: 3
Alien Sex Fiend really knows their shit.Alien Sex Fiend really knows their shit.Alien Sex Fiend really knows their shit.Alien Sex Fiend really knows their shit.Alien Sex Fiend really knows their shit.Alien Sex Fiend really knows their shit.Alien Sex Fiend really knows their shit.Alien Sex Fiend really knows their shit.Alien Sex Fiend really knows their shit.Alien Sex Fiend really knows their shit.
Points: 3,342, Level: 8	Points: 3,342, Level: 8	Points: 3,342, Level: 8
Activity: 0%		Activity: 0%		Activity: 0%
Re: Shisha (hookah aka "waterpipe") smoking as bad as cigarettes for lungs
as i said, at least cigarette brands write what there is and isn't on a carton. when you buy shisha flavor, it doesn't have anything on the package 90% of brands. i normally buy turkish ones and sometimes these only say how much tobacco there is in the mix, sometimes doesn't even say that!

i mean there flavors like chocolate, honey, mint, apples, banana, kivi, rose, apples, melon, grapes, raisins and what not

i can see how they put mint or raisins or honey in there but grapes? it could be any non-organic flavoring in there

i buy from the same tobacco shop for years and the turk who owns it doesn't know himself whats really in most of these mixes.

i prefer mint.

ive tried grapes, melon and kivi and these leave a mild chemical smell in the mouth

a shisha is a mix of moist sheet tobacco(what ever dangerous chemicals are found it dried tobacco plant, these are also present in shisha) and honey and other ingredients. it feels like chopped grass, mixed with jam and left for 24hours on a table. it has very weird colors like dark red, dark brown, dark purple, very dark green, very dark yellow and smells like rose water or very nice like the stuff fairy ladies use for armpits

  #6  
Old 21-09-2012, 08:22
	
micheljohn331  micheljohn331 is offline
Banned
 	
Join Date: 23-05-2012
28 y/o Male from India
Posts: 4
micheljohn331 is an unknown quantity at this point
Re: Shisha smoking as bad as cigarettes for lungs
It's a nice collection of cigarates smoking statistics.shesha smoking is also bad for health.different ways of smoking is harmful.but it effect accordingly.pipe smoking makes direct effect on a lungs.



Share this on:
Submit Thread to Facebook Facebook Submit Thread to Twitter Twitter Submit Thread to Reddit Reddit Submit Thread to StumbleUpon StumbleUpon Submit Thread to Google Google Submit Thread to del.icio.us del.icio.us Submit Thread to Digg Digg

Tags
cigarette harmful effects, cigarette health effects, cigarette news, cigarettes, shisha, shisha harmful effects, shisha health effects, shisha news, tobacco, tobacco health effects, tobacco news

« Previous Thread | Next Thread »


Similar Threads
Thread	Thread Starter	Forum	Replies	Last Post
The psychedelic crisis: bad trip	Joe-(5-HTP)	Wiki Articles	28	18-06-2016 22:07
UK - Shisha 'as harmful as cigarettes'	chillinwill	Health	7	10-11-2009 17:08
» New Threads
Be careful how much you snort when...
 Last post by Irael
0 Replies, 12 Views
Where is PCP (Phencyclidine)
 Last post by Reclaimer
4 Replies, 176 Views
A question for my fellow addicts...
 Last post by MajN-
21 Replies, 929 Views
Pure CBD crystals
 Last post by Alfa
3 Replies, 70 Views
Attempts to Make Super-Strength...
 Last post by Beenthere2Hippie
0 Replies, 33 Views
Just caught partner smoking meth -...
 Last post by MajN-
3 Replies, 264 Views
Missing your shot or blowing your...
 Last post by Inknice
0 Replies, 49 Views
Cannabidiol
 Last post by Alfa
6 Replies, 9,600 Views
First LSD Trip
 Last post by Nujrakris
0 Replies, 41 Views
CBD, did you try?
 Last post by Sufficiently Sedated
7 Replies, 919 Views

» New Wiki Articles
Cannabidiol
Papaveraceae
Entactogen
Relaxant
Stimulant
Research Chemical
Aripiprazole
Alcohol
Drug Laws in Australia
Cold Water Extraction of Opioids