March 2015
Living Well for Longer: One year on
2
Title: Living Well for Longer: One year on
Author: PIHD/ IHPHPS/ RAMP
Document Purpose: Policy
Publication date: March 2015
Target audience:
Clinical Commissioning Groups, Chairs of Health & Wellbeing Boards, NHS Trust CEs, NHS England Area Teams,
Care Trust CEs, Foundation Trust CEs, Medical Directors, Directors of Nursing, Local Authority CEs, Directors of
PH, Directors of Adult SSs, NHS Trust Board Chairs, Special HA CEs, Directors of HR, Directors of Finance, Allied
Health Professionals, GPs, Communications Leads, Emergency Care Leads, Directors of Children’s SSs, voluntary
& community sector, commissioners and providers of other public services, Government departments
Circulation list:
NHS Trust CEs, Care Trust CEs, Foundation Trust CEs, Medical Directors, Local Authority CEs, Chairs of Health &
Wellbeing Boards, NHS Trust Board Chairs, Special HA CEs, GPs, Voluntary Organisations, NDPBs, other
Government Departments, Clinical Commissioning Group Clinical Leads and Clinical Commissioning Group Chief
Officers, Local Authority Directors of Public Health
Description:
Sets out progress over 2014/15 by Government, Public Health England (PHE) and NHS England to reduce
premature avoidable mortality as set out in Living Well for Longer: National Support for Local Action to Reduce
Premature Avoidable Mortality. It also provides and outline of the next steps for partners in delivering ongoing
improvements in premature mortality.
Cross reference:
Living Well for Longer: A Call to Action to Reduce Avoidable Premature Mortality
Living Well for Longer: National Support for Local Action to Reduce Premature Avoidable Mortality
Superseded documents: N/A
Action required: N/A
Timing: N/A
Contact details:
Public Health Policy and Strategy Unit, Richmond House
79 Whitehall, London SW1A 2NS
You may re-use the text of this document (not including logos) free of charge in any format or medium,
under the terms of the Open Government Licence. To view this licence, visit
www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/
© Crown copyright
Published to gov.uk, in PDF format only. www.gov.uk/dh
3
Living Well for Longer: One year on
Prepared by
The Reducing Avoidable Premature Mortality Programme in The Department of Health
4
Foreword
Jane Ellison Jane Ellison MP, Parliamentary Under Secretary for Public Health
In 2010, The Secretary of State for Health made clear his intention to
focus on reducing premature mortality in England from the five big killers;
cancer, heart disease, stroke, respiratory and liver disease.
His Call to Action challenged us to maximise the potential of the new system to work
together towards England becoming amongst the best in Europe at reducing premature
mortality by 2020. And last year in Living Well for Longer: National support for local
action, we set out how the national collective efforts of Government, NHS England and
Public Health England combine and align in support of local commissioners and
providers as they lead improvements in health outcomes for our communities.
What has proved vital is our partnership with the wider community of activists in health
and wellbeing. Our stakeholders and partners in the voluntary and community sector,
nationally and locally, have helped drive the debate and have embedded the challenge
to reduce premature mortality and health inequalities.
I am especially impressed by the relationships across the wider health and care system
which have accelerated progress faster than we might have anticipated. The reforms
have allowed us to do things differently and as a result the system is now in a much
better place to deliver the ambitions we set out almost 2 years ago.
Across the spectrum of action for health, it is prevention where we will need to make the
greatest strides in the years to come if we are to realise the Secretary of State’s
ambition, and if we are to make that a sustainable outcome. NHS England and Public
Health England along with all the sectors arms-length bodies have placed prevention
front and centre of their plans for the future.
We started out 2 years ago on this road to refocus the newly established health and
care system on our core objective, to help everyone live well for longer. We said that
“this is an important time for us – to be bold and ambitious for health”. I believe we have
been just that; not just at the national level, but importantly, at the local level and across
the wider health and care system. It will be for all of us to now ensure we continue to
challenge ourselves and each other to go further, faster towards our goal – to live well
for longer.
5
Contents
Foreword 4
Contents 5
Executive Summary 7
1. Introduction 10
2. Setting the scene 11
3. Reducing premature mortality in the new health and care environment 14
Shared system leadership 14
Accountability and transparency 14
Ensuring prevention is front and centre 15
4. Sector Engagement 16
5. Delivering Living Well for Longer and beyond 18
Prevention 18
Reducing the burden of high blood pressure 18
Reducing obesity 19
Increasing levels of physical activity 21
Reducing smoking prevalence 22
Reducing harmful alcohol consumption 24
NHS Health Check 25
System wide prevention activity 26
Early diagnosis 26
Symptom awareness campaigns 26
Cancer screening 28
Access to scientific and diagnostic commissioning information 29
Prime Minister Challenge Fund Pilots 29
Treatment 30
Stimulating a focus on reducing premature mortality across the NHS 30
Incentives 30
Proton Beam Therapy 31
Stroke services 31
Congenital heart disease review 31
Making every contact count 32
Learning disabilities 33
6. Next steps 34
Shared system leadership 35
Accountability and transparency 35
Ensuring prevention is front and centre 36
Treatment: improving outcomes for patients 38
Mental health 38
Cancer 38
6
Liver disease 39
Acute kidney injury 40
Sepsis 41
Diabetes 41
Self care 42
New models of care 43
Looking to the future 44
7
Executive Summary
Since 2010 this Government has made its commitment to reducing early deaths from the five
big killers very clear. The Secretary of State’s Call to Action in 2013 challenged the system to
work together towards England becoming amongst the best in Europe at reducing premature
mortality by 2020. It also started an open and honest debate across the newly established
system on how best to reduce premature mortality.
In 2014, Living Well for Longer: National support for local action (LWfL) set out the detail of the
national actions taken by the Department of Health, wider government, NHS England and
Public Health England (PHE) in the prevention, early diagnosis and treatment of the five big
killer diseases and to reduce health inequalities. It showed how the national organisations would
support local leadership and interventions
A year later things have moved on further and faster than we might have anticipated; the
reforms have allowed us to do things differently and as a result the system is in a much better
place to deliver the ambitions of LWfL.
NHS England (in the Five Year Forward View (5YFV)) and PHE (in From evidence into action)
have published long term plans which echo the need to prioritise and mainstream prevention as
fundamental in improving outcomes for people and maintaining the sustainability of the health
and care system. There is a similar emphasis in the voluntary sector.
Reducing premature mortality in the new health and care environment
Progress towards developing the systems and behaviour change required to deliver the
ambition has been steady across the sector over the past year and, while the impact on
outcomes will take a while to show, the plans are in place to demonstrate the system is
prepared and on the right track.
This report addresses progress in three areas, identified by the Richmond Group in their report
What is preventing progress? which provides the foundations for action. The first is shared
system leadership. LWfL initiated the new system’s drive towards improving outcomes for the
people of England and demonstrated the Government’s commitment to the joint system
approach.
However the responsibility to drive and support those changes has transferred to local
organisations supported by NHS England and PHE, working alongside their partners in local
government. The 5YFV sets out the plans both organisations have to work in partnership and
establishes an overarching governance to ensure this collaboration becomes a reality.
The second theme is accountability and transparency which aligns with this Government’s
commitment to making sector wide information available in an easy to understand, regularly
updated form that is useful to the public and professionals alike. MyNHS brings health and care
data together in one place for the first time to allow comparison at a local level. 
Living Well for Longer: One year on, 2015
8
Finally, ensuring prevention is front and centre is a common refrain across the sector but for the
first time, with the establishment of an NHS prevention programme there is a clear way forward.
With an initial focus on diabetes the joint NHS Prevention Board will provide the structure
through which NHS England supports PHE’s strategies and priorities in public health, ensuring
they are delivered.
Delivering Living Well for Longer and beyond
The deliverables are described under the familiar headings of prevention, early diagnosis and
treatment. Some have been achieved early and others have flexed or been modified when an
alternative action has emerged. These are listed below with detailed information provided in this
report:
Next steps
It is essential that NHS England, local NHS bodies, PHE and local authorities continue to build
on progress, ensuring that the priorities of prevention, early diagnosis and effective, evidence
based treatments are normalised in all future policy developments and account is taken of
health inequalities.
Shared system leadership and recognising where there are common goals is fundamental to
successful progress. NHS England and PHE have established clear structures and governance
around common areas of interest with plans on how they will work together on cross-cutting
themes.
Greater availability of accessible local information will stimulate self-improvement rather than
relying on centrally driven performance targets. Increasing accountability and transparency will
Prevention
• Reducing the burden
of high blood pressure
• Reducing obesity
• Increasing levels of
physical activity
• Reducing smoking
prevalence
• Reducing harmful
alcohol consumption
• NHS Health Check
Early
Diagnosis
• Symptom awareness
campaigns
• Cancer screening
• Access to scientific
and diagnostic
commissioning
information
• Prime Minister's
Challenge Fund Pilots
Treatment
• Stimulating a focus on
premature mortality
and incentives
• Proton beam therapy
• Service reconfiguration
• Making every contact
count
• Reducing mortality for
people with learning
disabilities 
9
mean localities have meaningful data and information to judge performance as well as hold
organisations and professionals to account for the quality of their services and local outcomes.
That prevention is at the heart of a sustainable health and care system is now embedded in the
plans and priorities of NHS England and PHE with a common understanding of priorities and a
shared commitment to deliver. In addition, the health and care reforms have put the right
organisations in the right places and the more devolved system is able to deliver responsive
and tailored services to meet local needs, including on reducing early deaths and health
inequalities.
There are also a number of more specific improvements underway to improve outcomes for
patients, these include: mental health, cancer, liver disease, acute kidney injury, sepsis,
diabetes, self-care, and on new models of care.
Looking to the future
One year after LWfL was published we find ourselves with an opportunity to make real change
across the system. We have the right organisations in place, newly established mechanisms to
support and collaborate with each other and clearly articulated commitments to delivering a
paradigm shift in how health and care, in its broadest sense, is delivered.
There is consensus on the areas that we need to focus on to maximise the impact on the health
and care system and on reducing premature mortality. We either know, or are building the
evidence base of what works and are agreed about the benefits of working as a broad coalition
to implement the processes, services and systems.
The document sets out the next steps under the previous headings of shared system
leadership, accountability and transparency as well as putting prevention first.
It concludes that it is now time for the Department of Health to step back and let the system as a
whole, as well as each component part, do its work; while Government continues to undertake
the actions only it can carry out, including providing the framework within which the health and
care system works which recognises the importance of reducing avoidable mortality.
For the future, the Department’s role will be to hold partners to account to deliver all this,
including how well the inequalities duties for the Secretary of State and NHS England have
been fulfilled. We will remain an active partner in the coalition of effort across the system and
will still play a key role in supporting the system at all levels to do what is necessary to reduce
premature mortality and move us towards being amongst the best in Europe by 2020.
Living Well for Longer: One year on, 2015
10
1. Introduction
1.1 When we published Living Well for Longer: National Support for Local Action to Reduce
Premature Avoidable Mortality (LWfL) the Department made a commitment to review and
report on progress towards the delivery commitments in LWfL.
1.2 This document provides that update on LWfL at a national level and, as with the original,
some case studies and information setting out how ideas and evidence are put into
practice at a local level. It also includes information on programmes and projects which
have been initiated since April 2014 that will be key to delivering the required reductions in
premature mortality in the short and longer term. Finally it provides an outline on next
steps for the national organisations.
1.3 It is important to note that, whilst we are confident the actions in LWfL will have an impact
on reducing premature mortality, this will take time to become visible within the mortality
statistics as will reductions in health inequalities. As a consequence this report focuses on
the measures of activities undertaken and the changes in behaviours that will lead to the
longer term reductions in mortality.
1.4 In addition, while the majority of deliverables in LWfL have continued to be seen as key to
delivering the reduction in premature mortality, in some cases the evidence or priorities
have changed so the discussion and outputs reflect these changes. For example NHS
England’s focus on prevention and management of acute kidney injury and sepsis and
their work with Public Health England on diabetes prevention are priorities that have
emerged since April 2014.
11
2. Setting the scene
2.1 This Government made clear its intention to focus on reducing premature mortality in
England from the five big killers – cancer, heart disease, stroke, respiratory and liver
disease - from the outset. The Secretary of State’s Call to Action1
recognised that, while
great health improvements have taken place over previous decades, in comparative terms
we perform poorly2
and we continue to see deep-seated inequalities between different
regions, smaller areas and groups in society. In light of this evidence the Secretary of
State challenged the system to work together towards England becoming amongst the
best in Europe at reducing premature mortality by 2020.
2.2 We recognised that achieving such a challenging ambition would require effective
collaboration at national, regional and local level. The reforms to the health and care
system required greater alignment of effort across the whole system to improve health
outcomes and reduce health inequalities. The NHS and Public Health Outcomes
Frameworks recognised this need to focus on premature mortality, with shared indicators
included in both, requiring effort on all fronts, from prevention to earlier diagnosis to
treatment.
2.3 Living Well for Longer (LWfL)3
set out the detail of this joint enterprise across the national
players in the health and care system. Supported by the Reducing Avoidable Mortality
Programme, it has provided the mechanism through which the Department of Health (DH),
in partnership with system leaders, has led and facilitated this collective approach. LWfL
brought together, in one place, the national actions taken by DH and wider Government,
NHS England and Public Health England (PHE), in the prevention, early diagnosis and
treatment of the five big killer diseases and shows how they will support local leadership
and interventions.
2.4 Of course it is not all about government and national players. When the Call to Action was
published in 2013 the Secretary of State was clear that he intended it to stimulate debate
not just in the health and care sector, but in the wider community as well. What we have
seen is a groundswell of interest and engagement with other stakeholders playing a key
role in providing information, contacts and services which impact on the goal of reducing
premature mortality.

1
Living Well for Longer: A call to action to reduce avoidable premature mortality (March 2013), Department of
Health; https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/living-well-for-longer-a-call-to-action-to-reduce-avoidablepremature-mortality
2 UK health performance: findings of the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. Murray CJL, Richards, MA,
Newton, JN, Fenton KA, Anderson HR, Atkinson C, Bennett D et al; The Lancet –381, 9871, pp 997-1020 (March
2013)
3
Living Well for Longer: National Support for Local Action to Reduce Premature Avoidable Mortality (April 2014),
Department of Health; https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/helping-people-live-well-for-longer
Living Well for Longer: One year on, 2015
12
2.5 A year later things have moved on further and faster than we might have anticipated; the
reforms have allowed us to do things differently and as a consequence the system is now
in a much better place to deliver the ambitions of LWfL. A recent report4
suggests that
embedding public health within local authorities is expected to lead to better health
outcomes and has ‘given cause for optimism’.
2.6 Overall, we continue to be relatively good at treatment5
and we are improving our capacity
and capabilities in early diagnosis but the reality is that healthcare has only a limited
impact on our health. Undoubtedly it is important that, once we are unwell, the care we
receive is the best possible, and this has been demonstrated in improvements in stroke
and heart attack care over the past decade or so.
2.7 However, to reduce the impact of long term conditions we need to re-focus attention on
how people live their lives, the impact of social circumstances on health, our experiences
and the opportunities we have to influence our own health. This is crucial not just because
of the impact on individual lives but also if the system which we value and rely on is to be
sustainable into the future. Now, through a coalition of effort, we are in a much better
position to redouble efforts to address the prevention of disease and self-care across the
system.
2.8 There is a new degree of consensus about direction of travel and emphasis on delivery of
prevention services by the appropriate organisations at the right level. Both NHS England
and PHE have recently published long term plans which echo each other in terms of the
need to prioritise and mainstream prevention, be that primary prevention in public health or
secondary and tertiary prevention in the NHS. Both documents acknowledge the need to
‘harness’ the potential of patients, employers, communities and all levels of government in
addressing the issue of preventing the development of disease.
2.9 PHE’s new strategy6
, From evidence into action, looks to stimulate a focus on creating and
protecting health, not only treating ill-health; identifying the opportunities for tackling the
major public health issues using evidence including behavioural sciences. These evidence
based priorities include obesity, smoking and harmful drinking; the major lifestyle risks
which contribute to our higher levels of premature mortality. There is also a significant
focus on new drivers and opportunities to ensure a sustainable health and care sector,
these include the chance to develop evidence-based prevention services, such as for
diabetes, with the NHS and implement them at scale.

4
In good health: Public health teams in local authorities Year 2; (February 2015); Royal Society for Public Health;
http://www.rsph.org.uk/filemanager/root/site_assets/our_work/reports_and_publications/publichealth_03.02.15.ind.
2_.pdf
5 Mirror, mirror on the wall: How the performance of the US health care system compares internationally (June
2014); Davis K, Stremikis K, Squires D, Schoen C; The Commonwealth Fund
http://www.commonwealthfund.org/publications/fund-reports/2014/jun/mirror-mirror
6
From evidence into action: opportunities to protect and improve the nation’s health (October 2014); Public Health
England; https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/from-evidence-into-action-opportunities-to-protect-andimprove-the-nations-health
13
2.10 NHS England’s Five Year Forward View7
(5YFV) is also explicit in its commitment to get
‘… serious about prevention’. This plan, though developed by NHS England, has
signatories from the major health arm’s length bodies; PHE, Health Education England
(HEE), the Care Quality Commission, Monitor and the NHS Trust Development Authority
(TDA).
2.11 It outlines the need to incentivise and support healthier behaviours through information,
targeted personal support and wider changes. It also commits the NHS to work closely
with local authorities, through health and wellbeing boards and directly, supporting them in
their statutory responsibilities for improving the health of their populations. The intention is
that the NHS will support the refocus on prevention through three main routes.
 The first, empowering patients by ensuring people have access to information and
support to manage their health and where required with increased direct control over
their care.
 The second is through engaging communities, involving them in decisions about the
future of health and care; with better support for carers, working constructively with the
voluntary sector and using the role of the NHS as an employer to achieve wider health
goals.
 Finally, using the NHS as a social movement, accompanied by actions by the system
itself.
2.12 There is a similar emphasis in the voluntary sector8
, where there is a recognition that
prevention should be at the heart of the health services and at centre of policy making.
Enabling people to live longer, healthier lives at the same time as ensuring the health and
care system is sustainable in the longer term.

7
Five year forward view (October 2014); NHS England; http://www.england.nhs.uk/ourwork/futurenhs/
8 What is preventing progress? Time to move from talk to action on reducing preventable illness (November 2014)
http://www.richmondgroupofcharities.org.uk/What-is-preventing-progress-2014.pdf
Living Well for Longer: One year on, 2015
14
3. Reducing premature mortality in the
new health and care environment
3.1 Despite the significant changes the system has undergone over the past year a number of
key developments have taken place which we believe have put us in a much stronger
place in terms of action to reduce early deaths.
3.2 The Department of Health (DH) has grown into its system steward role. We have
increasingly been able to step back from directly developing policy to leading and aligning
policy and activity whilst holding others to account. NHS England and PHE have key roles
in supporting local organisations to deliver services that are tailored to local need and to
do so by developing and providing evidence to inform planning and implementation.
3.3 The Richmond Group of Charities identified three particular areas which they suggest
should provide the foundations for action; to translate commitments and evidence into
concrete actions and outcomes for the population. These are shared system leadership,
accountability and transparency and the importance of prevention. We have used these as
a helpful way to set out what has happened over the past year and plans for the future.
Shared system leadership
3.4 Living Well for Longer (LWfL) initiated the new systems drive towards improving outcomes
for the people of England, setting out the scale of the challenge to reduce premature
mortality and crystallising the themes of the greater emphasis on prevention. It also
demonstrated the Government’s commitment to the joint system approach.
3.5 However, it is no longer the Government’s role in the new system to dictate to local
services how they deliver the desired reductions in premature mortality. The responsibility
to drive and support those changes has transferred to local organisations supported by
NHS England and PHE, working alongside their partners in local government.
3.6 The 5YFV and From evidence into action both emphasise the need for all partners to work
together and establishing the overarching governance to ensure this collaboration
becomes a reality. This collaboration will focus on a number of cross-cutting common
areas of interest, including prevention, new models of care, the NHS as a healthy
employer and how to engage the public in taking more responsibility for their health. There
is more about these, particularly on prevention, later in this document.
Accountability and transparency
3.7 The Government has been clear that the system should move away from a culture of
targets to one of transparency; targets matter but they are not the best or only way to
improve outcomes. It is about increasing the availability of accessible information to
stimulate self-improvement rather than enforcing centrally driven performance targets;
using natural professional competitiveness combined with the pressure of peer review. 
15
3.8 On this, the system as a whole has much to learn from local government and public health
where a wealth of information is already available on performance and outcomes, for
example on local government’s LG Inform9
and PHE’s longer lives10
. These sites provide
meaningful data and information to enable intermediaries such as local healthwatch to
hold organisations and professionals to account not just for the quality of their services and
care but also for the outcomes.
3.9 Alignment and joint working has been integral to the design of the new whole system
approach. At its heart are the outcomes frameworks which were co-produced by DH and
system leaders. These provide a series of agreed global outcome measures which provide
indicators, some shared, of how well organisations and localities are delivering the
common goal of reducing premature mortality and there is an increasing focus on
inequalities. The detail of how the outcomes are delivered is up to local areas, assisted by
NHS England and PHE who are responsible for providing evidence and support for local
commissioning and delivery.
3.10 To support this agenda more widely across the health and care sector the Secretary of
State has commissioned system leaders to develop MyNHS. This website provides easy
to understand, regularly updated, information to the public and professionals alike. It brings
health and care data together in one place for the first time, allowing comparison of the
performance of local health and care services, GP practice, public health and health
outcomes.
Ensuring prevention is front and centre
3.11 The importance of prevention has been acknowledged in many strategies and plans over
the past decades. However, we have rarely had such a degree of consensus amongst all
partners in the NHS and public health that this must be addressed now, if the system is to
be sustained into the future.
3.12 The 5YFV makes it clear that NHS England is committed to supporting PHE’s strategy and
priorities on prevention and will work with them to ensure they are delivered. NHS England
is also committing the NHS itself to becoming an agent for change through incentivising
and supporting healthier behaviours; supporting local democratic autonomy to design
place-based solutions; proactive primary care engaging in targeted secondary prevention,
supporting people to stay in work and employers to support them to do so.
3.13 As part of the overarching governance to support delivery of the 5YFV, a joint NHS
Prevention Board has been established across the partner organisations to ensure
coordination of the programmes of work. There is more detail on the NHS Prevention
Programme in ‘Looking to the future’.

9
http://lginform.local.gov.uk/
10 http://healthierlives.phe.org.uk/topic/mortality
Living Well for Longer: One year on, 2015
16
4. Sector Engagement
4.1 With his Call to Action in 2013, the Secretary of State for Health wanted to open an
enduring and sustainable debate on reducing premature mortality. He felt it was too
important an issue to discuss through short-term consultations; rather, he wanted there to
be open and honest debate across the newly established system, and for that system to
work hand in hand with experts in national charities, royal colleges and in academia.
4.2 Over the past 12 months, with the system being in transition, it has been essential to work
with our partners across the wider health and care system at a local as well as a national
level. We have engaged with many organisations and individuals whose activities directly
contribute to reducing premature mortality and health inequalities, and some are working
directly with us in DH, with NHS England and with PHE to help drive improvements in
outcomes.
4.3 Some of this engagement has been through DH’s formal channels such as the Health and
Care Partnership, some has been through Twitter and the Living Longer11 website which
has hosted a range of blogs from a wide variety of contributors including Rethink, the
Richmond Group, the Queen’s Nursing Institute and the Royal Society for Public Health.
We have engaged with the sector through other formal means such as the Public Health
System Group convened by PHE, and the Public Health Cross-government Officials
Group. Reducing premature mortality has also been a regular topic at Secretary of State’s
weekly meetings with stakeholders.
4.4 Much of our engagement with stakeholders has driven work forward on reducing
premature mortality at the strategic level. For example in helping to shape and develop a
whole system approach to prevention and better management of comorbidities12. At the
more specific level experts and system leaders have been working with us on focused
priority areas such as:
 PHE have convened a Blood Pressure System Leadership Board which involves
partners across national and local government, the health service, voluntary sector and
academia. This cross-sector group ensures there is shared ownership of this issue and
oversee a programme of work to improve the prevention, detection and management of
high blood pressure. The first phase of their work culminated in publication of Tackling
high blood pressure: from evidence into action13

11 http://livinglonger.dh.gov.uk/living-longer/
12 Comorbidities:a framework of principles for system-wide action; (May 2014) Department of Health;
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/better-care-for-people-with-2-or-more-long-term-conditions
13 Tackling high blood pressure: from evidence into action; (November 2014); Public Health England;
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/high-blood-pressure-action-plan
17
 NHS England have involved a broad range of partners in their specific work
programmes on supporting improved follow up to health checks, and the
implementation of NICE guidance on behaviour change in support of ‘making every
contact count’. Stakeholder events were held on both workstreams, and an Expert
Reference Group has been established to support the behaviour change workstream.
4.5 PHE and the LGA working together with local councils are embedding a sector-led
approach to performance improvement. The Health and Wellbeing System Improvement
Programme in 2013-14, funded by DH, provided a range of products. These included peer
challenges, an updated self-assessment tool and a wealth of shared knowledge and
intelligence with a focus on reducing premature mortality and improving the quality of life
for local communities.
4.6 What has been essential is the continued commitment to a common purpose by our
partners and stakeholders beyond DH, PHE and NHS England. ‘Living well for longer’ has
provided that focal point for debate across the health and care system, and with our
partners in the wider system.
Living Well for Longer: One year on, 2015
18
5. Delivering Living Well for Longer and
beyond
5.1 Progress towards developing the required systems and behaviour change to deliver the
ambition has been steady across the sector and, while the impact on outcomes will take a
while to show, the plans that are in place demonstrate the system is prepared and on the
right track.
5.2 This section sets out the detail of what has been achieved in the last year at national level
in terms of the specific deliverables set out in LWfL. Some have been achieved early and
others have flexed or been modified when an alternative action has emerged or priorities
have changed.
5.3 We have considered the deliverables under the familiar headings of prevention, early
diagnosis and treatment to ensure consistency with the original document.
Prevention
Reducing the burden of high blood pressure
5.4 Raised blood pressure is the second biggest risk factor for disability and premature
mortality. We have seen improvements in prevention, detection and management in the
last decade which have prevented or postponed many deaths. However, in comparison to
international leaders we have significant scope for improvement. Evidence suggests only
four in 10 adults with high blood pressure in England are diagnosed and managed
effectively, in part because people are often unaware they have the condition or of the
risks to their health of uncontrolled high blood pressure.
5.5 High sodium intake is a major contributing factor to high blood pressure, and reductions of
15% in salt intake have been achieved since 2001 by Government working with industry.
This equates to over 5,000 premature deaths saved each year.
5.6 Despite the significance of the condition, there had not been a government programme on
the topic in recent years. PHE have now brought together insight and expertise from a
wide range of partner organisations in establishing the Blood Pressure System Leadership
Board, with representation from national and local government, the health system,
voluntary sector and academia.
5.7 The Board’s first joint product, Tackling high blood pressure: From evidence into action14
,
proposes areas of focus for the prevention, detection and management of high blood
pressure. It sets out how organisations at all levels can tackle these issues, and sets out
commitments amongst Board members to contribute towards this.

14 Tackling high blood pressure: from evidence into action; (2014); Public Health England;
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/high-blood-pressure-action-plan
19
5.8 This is supported by a resource hub for local leadership15
, public-facing quiz16
, economic
review of interventions’ cost-effectiveness17 and data on local performance variation18
which is intended to be used alongside the plan. These materials have had over 20,000
visits since they were launched in November. Important work continues on implementation
and to communicate key insights from the programme to activate and support local
professional leadership. Partners are also working to inform and engage the public on this
issue.
5.9 In LWfL, and as part of the wider programme on blood pressure, PHE undertook a
marketing pilot in partnership with local colleagues in Wakefield. More than 3,500
individuals were tested and received lifestyle advice across community, pharmacy and
workplace settings. Following evaluation PHE are developing a toolkit for local use and
adaptation by areas interested in developing their own testing initiatives (including medical
protocols, marketing materials and learning points).
5.10 More broadly PHE is embarking upon a new lifestyle-focused marketing programme for
mid-life adults, which will address the risk factors for high blood pressure.
Reducing obesity
5.11 The prevalence of obesity has levelled off in recent years, but remains too high. Sixty two
percent of adults and 29.5% of children aged 2-15 are either overweight or obese19
.
Obesity presents a significant public health challenge; it is the leading cause of type 2
diabetes, heart disease and cancer and health inequalities are manifest. Tackling obesity
remains a priority for the Government and as a consequence PHE and DH have continued
to focus considerable attention on obesity policy.
5.12 The Government has made significant progress in school food. The School Food Plan20
,
was published by the Department for Education in 2013, and is designed to increase the

15 https://www.gov.uk/high-blood-pressure-plan-and-deliver-effective-services-and-treatment
16 http://www.nhs.uk/Tools/Pages/bloodpressurequiz.aspx
17 http://www.optimitymatrix.com/events/optimity-matrix-report-cost-effectiveness-review-of-blood-pressureinterventions-is-published
18 http://healthierlives.phe.org.uk/topic/hypertension
19 Health Survey for England - 2013, Trend tables (Dec 2014): www.hscic.gov.uk/catalogue/PUB16077
20 http://www.schoolfoodplan.com/
Stockport CCG is working to raise awareness of the importance of knowing your blood pressure. They
estimate one in four adults in Stockport has high blood pressure and the hypertension programme ‘Know
your numbers’ aims to aims to ensure more people know if they need to take action.
As part of the programme, health kiosks were set up for six months (April to October 2014) at sites across
Stockport to allow individuals to measure their blood pressure, weight, body mass index (BMI), body fat
content and heart rate. The technology proved popular, people were attracted to health kiosks as a method of
receiving health information.
For more information go to http://stockportccg.org/blood-pressure-2/
Living Well for Longer: One year on, 2015
20
quality and take up of school meals, and inspire a love of good food in children to help
boost academic performance and allow them to lead healthy lives.
5.13 The Plan outlines actions to improve food and food awareness in schools. These include
revising the existing school food standards, setting up breakfast clubs in schools with a
high proportion of pupils entitled to free school meals, and including a separate strand for
cookery in the new Design and Technology curriculum. Alongside this, every pupil in
reception, year 1 and year 2 attending a state-funded school is now entitled to a nutritious,
healthy free school lunch.
5.14 There has also been considerable attention paid to obesity by the research community, the
McKinsey Global Institute published a report in November into reducing obesity with a
focus on costs and impact21 and the Scientific Advisory Committee on Nutrition (SACN)
produced a draft report22 on carbohydrates (not obesity specifically) which was out for
consultation until September. SACN’s final report on carbohydrates is due later in 2015,
along with PHE’s review of the evidence on reducing sugar.
5.15 Forty two businesses have committed to reduce calories, including sugar, through the
Public Health Responsibility Deal’s calorie reduction pledge. Some impressive reductions
have been made in major brands by reformulation and developing smaller portion size
packs. Seventy per cent of the high street takeaways and fast food restaurants also have
calories clearly labelled.
5.16 The Change4Life23 social marketing programme continues to work to ensure fewer
children become overweight through inspiring families to eat well and move more. The
programme has high levels of engagement with local authorities and schools and more
than 70,000 local supporters. Change4Life is on target to reach 500,000 sign-ups by end
of financial year 2014/15. There were more than 292,000 registrations to the summer

21 Overcoming obesity: An initial economic analysis; (November 2015); McKinsey Global Institute;
http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/economic_studies/how_the_world_could_better_fight_obesity
22 https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/consultation-on-draft-sacn-carbohydrates-and-health-report
23 http://www.nhs.uk/change4life/Pages/change-for-life.aspx
Local produce & healthy eating at an inner city school
At Charlton Manor Primary School in South East London a corner of the school grounds has been turned into
a secret garden for learning, contemplation, food production and as a wildlife haven. Pupils are responsible
for keeping livestock, including chickens and bees, and the resulting produce is either used in the school
kitchen or sold by the children. The programme promotes links overseas and helps the children see how they
can learn from or inspire other countries to use their land to produce local and sustainable food. They are
now taking on more land to create even more locally grown produce, and expanding to involve a network of
local schools.
Recognising the importance of healthy eating and eating together, the headmaster has invested in a state-ofthe
art teaching kitchen and employs teaching chefs to give the children the best possible learning
experience. The children are involved in planning menus and serving lunch and it is no surprise that the
school has achieved the Gold Award for Healthy Schools London. 
21
2014, 10 Minute Shake-up campaign and the 2015 Sugar Swaps campaign24 which
started in January, is supporting families to cut back on sugar in their everyday food and
drink.
Increasing levels of physical activity
5.17 Physical inactivity directly contributes to one in six deaths in the UK25 and the link
between physical activity, ill-health and obesity is well established; with recent evidence26
suggesting that exercise is more important than obesity in promoting longevity.
5.18 The Government remains committed to promoting and increasing the levels of physical
activity and has a national ambition, reflected in the Public Health Outcomes Framework,
for a year on year increase in the proportion of adults doing 150 minutes of physical
activity per week and a similar reduction in those who are 'inactive' (less than 30 minutes a
week).
5.19 We have a well-developed and wide-ranging programme of actions to achieve this. This
includes:
 Investing almost £222m in programmes such as the PE and Sport Premium for Primary
Schools, School Games, and Change4Life Sports Clubs.
 Investment of £1.2m in five English cities to deliver a range of interventions to support
residents to build walking into their day-to-day lives.
5.20 In February 2014, the Government published Moving More, Living More27 (MMLM), a
cross-Government campaign to deliver a physical activity legacy from the 2012 Olympic
and Paralympic Games. The Minister for Public Health chairs a sub-group of the Cabinet
Committee for Olympic and Paralympic Legacy which has achieved significant progress in
the last year in taking forward the commitments in MMLM.
5.21 Examples include ongoing work to translate the Chief Medical Officer’s guidelines into
easily communicable messages for health professionals and the public; measures to
increase the amount of walking and cycling. To this end, the recent Government
amendment to the Infrastructure Bill is another clear indication of Government’s
commitment to find the resources needed to support cycling and walking infrastructure in

24 https://sugarswaps.change4life.co.uk/
25 Effect of physical inactivity on major non-communicable diseases worldwide: an analysis of burden of disease
and life expectancy; (July 2012); Lee I-M, et al; The Lancet 380:219-29
http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(12)61031-9/fulltext
26 Physical activity and all-cause mortality across levels of overall and abdominal adiposity in European men and
women: the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition Study (EPIC); (Jan 2015); Ekelund U, et
al; Am J Clin Nutr, 10.3945/ajcn.114.100065
http://ajcn.nutrition.org/content/early/2015/01/14/ajcn.114.100065.full.pdf+html
27 Moving More, Living More: The Physical Activity Olympic and Paralympic Legacy for the Nation; (Feb 2014); HM
Government; https://www.gov.uk/...data/.../moving_living_more_inspired_2012.pdf
Living Well for Longer: One year on, 2015
22
this country and raising public awareness with campaigns such as Sport England’s recent
This Girl Can28 campaign.
5.22 In October 2014, Public Health England published, Everybody active, Every day (EAED).
Building on MMLM, this framework aims to increase the levels of physical activity in local
communities by identifying key areas where more action is needed. Public Health England
have been organising a number of workshops across England to stimulate discussion
about ways to take forward the recommendations in EAED.
5.23 Finally, as part of the Responsibility Deal, the department has been working successfully
with a range of organisations to promote physical activity. Organisations have been
reaching out in a variety of ways, such as subsided gym membership, walking groups,
programmes for minority groups to promote the value of being active.
5.24 The Department of Health will continue work across Government and with other partners
to increase opportunities for people to be active and achieve its national ambition for a
more active nation.
Reducing smoking prevalence
5.25 Tobacco use remains a major public health challenge; smoking is harmful not only to
smokers but also to people around them. There has, however, continued to be good
progress over the past year on delivering the national ambitions to reduce smoking rates in
England by the end of 2015, set out in the Tobacco Control Plan for England29. These
were to reduce rates from:
 21.2% to 18.5% or less among adults, with the current figure at 18.4%,
 15% to 12% or less among 15 year olds, with the current figure at 8%, and

28 https://www.sportengland.org/our-work/equality-diversity/women/this-girl-can/
29 Healthy Lives, Healthy People: a Tobacco control Plan for England; (March 2011); Department of Health;
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/the-tobacco-control-plan-for-england
Responsibility Deal – Active Travel Pledge
Heathrow is investing in cycling and in 2012 opened the Heathrow Cycle Hub, the only airport with its own bike
shop. The facility provides staff with discounted cycles, equipment and clothing, servicing where the labour is
free and runs both maintenance and rider training. Heathrow is also an affiliated racing club with British
Cycling. As well as the cycle hub, Heathrow has over 500 cycle parking spaces around the campus that are
both covered and secure and there are additional locker and showering facilities available to staff.
Getting fit and having fun
Fit Reds is a local community health outreach programme in Barnsley offering men age 35+ the chance to
take part in an 8 week football fitness course. Participants are also offered access to an indoor gym as well as
diet and nutrition sessions to help reduce the high levels of cardiovascular disease in Barnsley. It’s been so
successful they plan to offer courses to women this year. http://barnsleyfccommunity.co.uk/health/join-the-fitreds-programme

23
 14% to 11% or less among pregnant mothers (measured at the time they give birth),
with the current figure at 11.4%
30
.
5.26 Adult smoking prevalence in England fell to 18.4% in 2013 which is the lowest figure since
records began and down from 19.5% in 2012. However, within this there are significant
inequalities. Smoking is higher among people in routine and manual jobs, and there is a
direct correlation between smoking and income – those who earn the least smoke the
most. For example, smoking prevalence is 11% for those on higher incomes, but 23% for
those on lower incomes. Similarly, smoking prevalence among more highly educated
groups is 10% but rises to 34% among those with lower qualifications.
5.27 As it committed to do in LWfL, PHE is running an annual Smokefree marketing programme
with the aim of triggering 750,000 quit attempts. This activity is currently still live but we are
on track to meet our challenging target.
5.28 Significant progress has been made under the Government’s comprehensive Tobacco
Control Plan for England which was published in March 2011. A focus has been on
protecting children from tobacco and nicotine. In 2011, the sale of tobacco from vending
machines was stopped and by April 2015, the open display of tobacco at retail points of
sale will no longer be permitted. New laws have been made to stop smoking in vehicles
carrying children from October 2015 and to stop adults buying tobacco on behalf of
children. Regulations to introduce standardised packaging for cigarettes and an age of
sale of 18 for e-cigarettes will be considered by Parliament before the end of March 2015.
5.29 The UK actively supported the negotiations for a new European Union-wide Tobacco
Products Directive, which was agreed in 2014. This Directive will bring the sale of
flavoured tobacco (including menthol) to an end and will end the sale of small packs of
cigarettes which can be more popular with children. Larger pictorial health warnings will
be required and new rules relating the sale of e-cigarettes will also come into place. New
arrangements, including unique security features, will also come into place across the
European Union to contribute to efforts to control illicit tobacco.
5.30 To promote health and wellbeing, DH has worked to encourage communities across
England to reshape social norms, so that tobacco becomes less desirable, less acceptable
and less accessible. The Government wants all communities to see a tobacco-free world
as the norm and aims to stop the perpetuation of smoking from one generation to the
next. Health Ministers have spoken in Parliament about their aspirations for a tobacco free
generation. In recognition of this work in 2015, DH has been awarded the prestigious
American Cancer Society’s Luther L Terry Award for exemplary global leadership in
tobacco control.

30 Statistics on Women's Smoking Status at Time of Delivery, England - Quarter 3, 2014-15; (March 2015);
http://www.hscic.gov.uk/catalogue/PUB16957
Living Well for Longer: One year on, 2015
24
Reducing harmful alcohol consumption
5.31 Alcohol is amongst the four biggest behavioural risk factors for illness and death and
continues to be an area of concern for the health and care sector, with greater harm
among more disadvantaged groups.
5.32 Through the Responsibility Deal, companies committed to voluntarily remove one billion
units of alcohol from the market (around 2%) by the end of 2015. This was achieved two
years early and is already 0.3bn over target. Reducing the strength of alcohol in people’s
drinks is expected to contribute, at no cost to the public purse, to a significant decrease in
health harm. Even small reductions by many companies affecting a wide customer base
are expected to help reduce health harm31
. Six new pledges were agreed in 2014,
including a pledge to sell no further single-serve cans with more than 4 units of alcohol,
and are expected to help improve these results.
5.33 Commitments to provide consumer information are also valuable. For example, supporting
alcohol misuse identification and brief advice programmes, such as the NHS Health
Check, delivered by health professionals, which have strong evidence of changing
behaviour.
5.34 Companies committed to having 80% of bottles and cans displaying unit content, the Chief
Medical Officer’s lower-risk guidelines and a warning about drinking when pregnant by the
end of 2013. An independent report in November 2014 found that 79.3% of labels provided
all three elements correctly (meeting the commitment); 92.8% provided correct pregnancy
information; 87% provided correct unit content; and 82.8% provided correct lower-risk
drinking guidelines32
.
5.35 Pubs and shops committed to a voluntary display of unit and health information. Ipsos Mori
carried out an independent survey this year, of whether the public saw such information.
Their report found that over a quarter of respondents reported seeing a British Beer and
Pub Association (BBPA) information image; over two in five 18-24 year-olds reported
seeing at least one BBPA image; over a quarter of respondents have seen something
similar, but different, to BBPA materials; more than half those seeing different materials
also reported seeing BBPA materials.
5.36 The remit letter33 has asked PHE to review the evidence and provide advice on the public
health impacts of alcohol and evidence-based solutions. PHE have brought together an
expert advisory group including key academics to identify the latest data on harm from

31 Second interim monitoring report: 2013 data: Monitoring the Public Health Responsibility Deal Alcohol Network
pledge to reduce 1 billion units of alcohol sold by the end of 2015; (December 2014); ONS;
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/units-of-alcohol-sold
32 Audit of compliance of alcoholic beverage labels available from the off-trade with the Public Health
Responsibility Deal Labelling Pledge; (November 2014);Campden BRI;
https://responsibilitydeal.dh.gov.uk/campden-bri-report-on-responsibility-deal-alcohol-labelling-pledge/
33 PHE Remit letter: 2014-2015; (June 2014); Department of Health;
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/phe-remit-letter-2014-to-2015
25
alcohol and evidence on the impact of various policy approaches. PHE are currently
undertaking an evidence review and the report to Government will be submitted in the
spring.
NHS Health Check
5.37 NHS Health Check is an ongoing national programme to assess, increase awareness and
manage risks for people aged 40-74 who have not been diagnosed with an existing
vascular disease. Modelling shows that through systematically addressing the top seven
causes of preventable mortality the programme has the potential to detect and help people
manage and prevent development of disease or death.
5.38 Over the past 12 months PHE has been supporting local authorities through a range of
mechanisms to increase the number of health checks offered and received by people aged
40-74 across the country, as part of the NHS Health Check Programme.
5.39 Specifically PHE has developed and launched new branded resources to enable local
authorities to promote health checks locally and content for the NHS Health Check pages
on the NHS Choices website including a service directory and case stories. This has been
well received; within the first few weeks over 100,000 people had viewed the site.
Publication of PHE’s competency framework and workbooks; piloting of an improvement
offer; the publication of NHS Health Check data on the Longer Lives atlas; delivering a
programme of webinars and the inclusion of prompts in the CQC inspection content are a
few of the key actions that have served to strengthen delivery quality and reach.
5.40 In 2014/15 PHE set out a shared commitment to offer the NHS Health Check to 20% of the
eligible population and to increase uptake towards 66%. Local authorities have made
excellent progress and are on track to offer the NHS Health Check to more than 3 million
people, nearly 250,000 more than in 2013/14. While efforts have also been focussed on
increasing uptake we know that effecting behaviour change is complex. PHE will continue
to develop, support and disseminate the findings of projects that evaluate the impact of
projects that apply behavioural insights to increase uptake.
5.41 For the programme to maximise its prevention potential it is also essential that people
taking up an NHS Health Check receive the correct clinical and behavioural support that
they need to reduce the risk of preventable diseases. PHE, NHS England and DH will
continue to work together to encourage and enable NHS Health Check commissioners and
providers to deliver this critical element of the programme. This is illustrated by the recent
commitment by NHS England and PHE to introduce at scale national evidence-based
diabetes prevention programme for those people found to be at risk of diabetes following
the NHS Health Check. 
Living Well for Longer: One year on, 2015
26
System wide prevention activity
5.42 With prevention being identified as key in delivering a sustainable health and care system
PHE and NHS England have come together with experts to develop a new NHS
Prevention Service. Senior leadership and governance for this is being provided through
the newly established NHS Prevention Programme Board which includes Diabetes UK.
The initial focus will be on developing the diabetes prevention programme but will also
include work on implementation of other specific commitments from the 5YFV.
5.43 Immediate tasks are to commission a review of the national and international evidence of
diabetes prevention programmes, seek expressions of interest from local health
economies to be involved in development of the programme and establish the baseline for
current service provision of weight management services.
Early diagnosis
5.44 Despite improvements in prevention, some disease will always occur and acting promptly
when warning signs appear is essential in preventing premature death. Increasing
symptom awareness amongst the public, improving identification of disease in primary
care and effective screening are all means by which we can improve early diagnosis and
hence access to the right treatment, with a particular need to focus on disadvantaged
groups where late presentation is a particular concern.
Symptom awareness campaigns
5.45 The Department of Health has, since 2010/11, funded a programme of symptom
awareness raising campaigns under the brand Be Clear on Cancer (BCOC). These have
been designed to tackle late presentation of patients with possible cancer symptoms and
thereby promote earlier diagnosis of cancer, when the cancer is more treatable. Since
April 2013 PHE has led on the campaigns, in partnership with DH and NHS England
continuing to encourage people to seek early advice if they experience symptoms.
5.46 During 2014/15 the campaigns have focused on:
 A national campaign on breast cancer in women over 70 (from February to March
2014) following the success of the regional pilot in early 2013;
 regional campaigns on oesophago-gastric (North East and Border TV regions) and
ovarian (North West TV region) cancers (from February to March 2014);
 a repeat of the national lung cancer campaign (March to end of April 2014);
Ensuring Cornish fishermen get their NHS Health Check
Commercial fishermen in England are at particularly high risk of poor health outcomes. Cornwall Council set
out to address this issue through the NHS Health Check programme, offering health checks for fishermen, on
the quayside, by a dedicated outreach service and support for lifestyle changes, including cooking sessions to
encourage healthy eating whilst at sea.
A similar approach has been developed for local farmers; taking health checks to where farmers meet.
For more information see: http://www.healthcheck.nhs.uk/document.php?o=788 
27
 a local skin cancer pilot in the South West (June to July 2014);
 a repeat of the national ‘blood in pee’ (bladder and kidney cancers) campaign
(October to November 2014);
 a local pilot on prostate cancer in black men, in six London boroughs (October to
November 2014); and
 a national oesophago-gastric cancer campaign (end of January to end of February
2015).
5.47 PHE have also made available campaign specific briefing sheets for trusts, GPs and
community pharmacies to support the cancer campaigns.
5.48 The BCOC campaigns are supported by a significant body of evidence that indicate the
impact of the activity. For example, in the months surrounding the 2012 national lung
campaign there were 700 more people diagnosed with lung cancer than the same period
the previous year. Also approximately 400 more had their cancers diagnosed at an early
stage and around 300 additional patients had surgery as a first treatment of diagnosed
lung cancer34
.
5.49 When looking at the 2013 BCOC national bladder and kidney cancer campaign, in
England there was a 26% increase in the number of urgent GP referrals for suspected
urological cancers (including suspected bladder and kidney cancers) from October to
December 2012 to October to December 2013. For the same time period, in England, the
number of bladder, kidney and all urological cancer diagnoses resulting from an urgent GP
referral for suspected urological cancers increased by 8.2%, 22% and 14% respectively,
with larger increases for males than females35
.
5.50 In addition to the campaigns on cancer, PHE have undertaken two other campaigns. The
first, a pilot aiming to raise awareness of breathlessness and aid early diagnosis of a range
of diseases such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, heart disease and lung cancer
was run in Oldham and Rochdale in early 2014. Encouraging results (77% said that the
advertising would make them more likely to go to the doctor and 16% said that they had
already taken action as a result of seeing the advertising) from the local activity resulted in
the scaling up of this pilot to the regional level in the East of England in February 2015.
5.51 The second was a local rheumatoid arthritis pilot in Nottingham City and Hardwick CCGs
in February 2015. The pilot focused on recognising and acting on the signs of rheumatoid
arthritis, a disease that can cause serious disability if left untreated. Work is underway to

34 An evaluation of the impact of large-scale interventions to raise public awareness of a lung cancer symptom;
(January 2015) Ironmonger L, Ohuma E, Ormiston-Smith N, Gildea C, Thomson CS, Peake MD. British Journal of
Cancer 112, 207–216. doi:10.1038/bjc.2014.596 http://www.nature.com/bjc/journal/v112/n1/abs/bjc2014596a.html
35 Improving Outcomes: A Strategy for Cancer – Fourth annual report (December 2014); Department of Health;
www.gov.uk/government/publications/the-national-cancer-strategy-4th-annual-report
Living Well for Longer: One year on, 2015
28
ensure rigorous evaluation which will include pre and post campaign evaluation and a
range of activity metrics.
Cancer screening
Improving Coverage
5.52 There has been a national and international long term trend showing a gradual fall in
cancer screening coverage over the last ten years, but there are options for reversing this
trend where appropriate, particularly in disadvantaged groups. PHE is working with NHS
England via the Public Health Section 7A agreement to develop a system of performance
improvement through the use of performance floors, and strengthened governance for
screening.
5.53 NHS England is working closely with Cancer Research UK to take forward the ACE
programme (Accelerate Coordinate and Evaluate) which is looking at options for improving
early diagnosis of cancer. The programme, which will be subject to a full evaluation,
includes a workstream on screening uptake for vulnerable groups – seven projects are
looking at effective ways to remove barriers to screening for a range of vulnerable groups
including those with sensory impairment, learning difficulties or minority ethnic groups.
5.54 DH Behavioural Insight team is developing a project on improving coverage in cervical
screening. In addition, a major research study on increasing uptake of cervical screening
in young women and bowel screening in disadvantaged groups are due to report in
2015/16.
LWfL commitments on cancer screening
5.55 There are three specific cancer screening commitments from PHE in LWfL. The first was
to complete the second wave role out of bowel scope screening with at least 60% of local
screening operational by 31st March 2015, with 100% operational by the end of December
2016. At publication, this commitment has been exceeded, with 39 centres (63%) live by
mid-March.
5.56 The second commitment was to run a pilot of faecal immunochemical testing (FIT) for
bowel cancer screening, a more accurate and simpler to use homes testing kit than the
current Faecal Occult Blood (FOB) testing kit, with the intention of evaluating acceptability
to the public along with clinical and cost-effectiveness. As FIT is easier to use, it is
anticipated to increase the uptake of bowel screening.
5.57 NHS cancer screening programmes began piloting FIT in spring 2014, and this pilot
completed in October 2014. The pilot involved 40,000 men and women over six months
from many screening centres in the South of England, North West and West Midlands.
The formal clinical and cost-effectiveness evaluation report is expected at the end of
March 2015. Expected outcomes are a higher participation rate across all groups in
society and higher detection rate of cancers and advanced adenomas.
29
5.58 Finally, there was a commitment to report on the first year of the six pilots sites of human
papillomavirus (HPV) testing as primary cervical screening. From May 2013 sites in
Liverpool, Manchester, Northwick Park (Harrow), Bristol, Sheffield and Norwich have been
using HPV testing as primary screening (HPV TaPS) for cervical disease, rather than the
currently used cytology test. Only HPV samples that are positive will undergo cytology,
whilst those women who are HPV negative can return to routine screening.
5.59 A formal evaluation of the pilot is taking place, and an interim report is due to go to the UK
NSC in March 2015. Cancer Research UK has estimated that, when fully implemented,
HPV primary screening could prevent an additional 600 cases of cervical cancer a year.
Access to scientific and diagnostic commissioning information
5.60 NHS England is working to ensure that scientific and diagnostic services are available to
support both prevention and early diagnosis across the life course and ongoing monitoring
of disease status by improving the scientific and diagnostic commissioning information
available to commissioners.
5.61 NHS England is leading a range of activities relating to the future commissioning of
diagnostics within both specialised and CCG commissioning, which over time will begin to
inform new approaches to the prediction and prevention of disease as well as the
application of new targeted therapies, in support of delivering the ambitions set out in the
5YFV.
Prime Minister Challenge Fund Pilots
5.62 NHS England committed in LWfL to evaluate the Prime Minister Challenge Fund pilots to
provide evidence on how to improve access to general practice services and develop more
innovative and sustainable models of primary care and improve patient experience.
5.63 They have 20 pilots in wave one involving over 1100 practices and covering over 7m
population and these will continue through to September 2015. The intention of the
evaluation is to develop a common set of evidence-based principles that can be used by
others in developing their approaches to improving access to services. A further £100m
has been announced for a second wave of pilots to run during 2015/2016. NHS England
is currently working on the wave two selection and wave two pilots to be announced later
in March.
The Extended Primary Integrated Care (EPiC) project has extended access to primary care services in
parts of Brighton and Hove by thinking about how General Practice delivers its functions.
To help people who need health guidance rather than medical care some GP practices have introduced care
navigators. These specially trained staff work with voluntary care organisations Age UK and Neighbourhood
Care to provide proactive advocacy and support to the community, particularly for those who are living on
their own or with complex needs.
They have also increased access and reconnected GPs to local community assets by working with local
pharmacists to set up ‘primary care’ centres to give patients a more responsive and flexible service, providing
same-day appointments, from 8am to 8pm on weekdays. On weekends patients have access to two sites
which are open from 8am to 5pm and a further two sites, open from 9am to 5pm.
Living Well for Longer: One year on, 2015
30
Treatment
5.64 There is a lot we can do to extend and improve the quality of lives through effective
treatment and LWfL identified the need to ensure that the quality of treatment is more
consistent across the country. LWfL set out a number of areas where NHS England have
been working to ensure people receive high quality care and experience the best
outcomes possible.
Stimulating a focus on reducing premature mortality across the NHS
5.65 Given the priority reducing early deaths has across the system it was important to
establish a way to articulate the contribution the commissioning system makes to reducing
premature mortality, ensuring commissioning plans focused on improving outcomes not
just outputs. The measure of this ambition is in potential years of life lost (PYLL).
5.66 NHS England committed to providing clinical advice and support for CCGs in setting and
delivering their levels of ambition throughout the year with the aim of all CCGs having
agreed levels of ambition to reduce premature mortality. This was achieved in September
and cumulatively CCGs have set a level of ambition of 12% reduction in PYLL to 2018/19.
Incentives
5.67 In April 2014 NHS England strengthened the existing quality premium on PYLL to ensure a
clear focus on delivering greater improvement in areas of high social deprivation.
5.68 In addition, to support NHS England’s commitment to reduce the 15 to 20 year premature
mortality in people with severe mental illness, a new CQUIN was introduced in April 2014.
The CQUIN incentivises providers of mental health services to ensure that service users
have recorded comprehensive physical and mental health diagnoses and that this is
shared with the service users GP. There are now 75 organisations providing relevant
mental health services which are signed up to the CQUIN. The CQUIN is expected to
continue in 2015/16 to progress improvements for patients with severe mental health
illness.
5.69 NHS England is expected to introduce new CQUINs with a view to improving the detection
and management of acute kidney injury (AKI) and sepsis in 2015/16. Both AKI and sepsis
are identified as short to medium-term priorities for reducing premature mortality by NHS
England. Consideration is also being given to the extension of the Quality Premium PYLL
measure and the CQUIN mental health measure.
5.70 Decisions by NHS England on the 2015/16 Quality Premium and CQUIN schemes are
expected later in the spring. Over the coming year NHS England will also be reviewing the
design of incentives in the light of the 5YFV.
31
Proton Beam Therapy
5.71 Proton Beam Therapy (PBT) is a very precise form of radiotherapy which uses charged
particles (protons) rather than conventional X-rays. It can be effective in treating a number
of complex cancers and avoiding damage to critical tissues near the tumour.
5.72 It is particularly effective in improving the outcomes from the treatment of cancer in
children and young people as it decreases the long term side effects and risk of late
second malignancy and consequently increases patient lifetime benefits.
5.73 In April 2008, the first patients were sent abroad for PBT treatment on the Proton
Overseas Programme. The National PBT Service Development Programme was formally
established in 2012 where the government announced £250m of public capital funding to
develop the new PBT centres. There is a Prime Ministerial commitment to open two new
centres (the first by 2018) while continuing to fund all clinically appropriate patients for
overseas PBT treatment.
5.74 NHS England is committed to publishing PBT clinical access policies for routine
commissioning. This contributes to delivering the ambitions on premature mortality by
defining the national mandatory access to the PBT overseas programme before the NHS
starts to provide a UK service in 2018.
Stroke services
5.75 NHS England set out clearly in the 5YFV the benefits, in terms of outcomes for patients, of
configuring some services to centralise specialist provision. LWfL included a commitment
on reconfiguring stroke services where NHS England has been working with networks to
understand the appetite and barriers in different localities and CCGs for service
reconfiguration. In line with the commitment in LWfL to build on the London experience,
Manchester’s new stroke service is expected to go live at the end of March. Birmingham
has already undergone some change with the next steps of reconfiguration currently in
development.
5.76 NHS England is supporting local communities to develop the case for reconfiguration of
local stroke services. A reconfiguration resource kit for CCGs based on existing and
successful acute stroke service reconfiguration examples has been produced by NHS
England to facilitate this.
Congenital heart disease review
5.77 In LWfL NHS England committed to, and is currently undertaking, a review of services for
children and adults with congenital heart disease. The aims of the review are to get the
best outcomes for patients; to tackle variation so that services across the country
consistently meet demanding performance standards and are able to offer resilient 24/7
care; and to improve patient experience.
Living Well for Longer: One year on, 2015
32
5.78 The consultation on draft standards and service specifications closed in December, with
around 450 responses and an independent report on the responses was published in early
March. The board of NHS England is expected to make its decisions on the review’s
recommendations in summer 2015, with the expectation that services will be
commissioned against the new specifications and standards in 2016. Work is underway
with national and local commissioners, providers and patient groups to establish timely
and appropriate commissioning processes as well as improvements in the available
information about the performance of congenital heart services.
Making every contact count
5.79 Improving health outcomes needs action at individual, community and national levels;
‘making every contact count’ (MECC) focuses on individuals and groups improving health
and wellbeing and contributing to overall improvement.
5.80 DH has been working to support a system wide approach to implementation and key
organisations including NHS England, PHE and HEE are undertaking work to support the
delivery of MECC across health and social care. MECC is also a core component of the
Framework for Personalised Care and Public Health36, and is directly linked to 23 of the
indicators in the Public Health Outcomes Framework. There is recognition of the
importance of staff having the right skills to deliver these interventions and work is ongoing
to ensure it is built into the Public Health Workforce Strategy.
5.81 The Mandate37 sets out an objective for NHS England to make significant progress ‘in
focusing the NHS on preventing illness, with staff using every contact they have with
people as an opportunity to help people stay in good health’ and to ‘make an important
contribution by promoting the mental and physical health and wellbeing of its own
workforce’.
5.82 NHS England will produce an action plan by the end of March to improve the NHS
contribution to prevention through the implementation of NICE guidance on behaviour
change relating to obesity, physical activity, alcohol and tobacco in support of MECC and
to reduce health inequalities. The action plan will focus on clinical leadership and
engagement through effective communications and partnership working; the development
of commissioning resources, tools and levers and supporting system leaders, HEE and
PHE, on defining the requirements for workforce training and education.
5.83 NHS England will also strive to be an exemplar in the development of its own strategy on
workforce health and wellbeing, and support NHS Employers in respect of the wider NHS
workforce.

36 Framework for Personalised Care and Public Health for Nurses, Midwives, Health Visitors and Allied Health
Professionals; (Nov 2014); Public Health England & Department of Health;
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/framework-for-personalised-care-and-population-health
37 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/nhs-mandate-2014-to-2015
33
Learning disabilities
5.84 Living Well for Longer recognised that it is often people who are most at risk of poor health
outcomes who are slowest to come forward and that they are also likely to be relatively
disadvantaged. To address this we need to understand how best to target interventions
and contribute to reducing health inequalities.
5.85 As part of this NHS England commissioned an evidence review of interventions to reduce
mortality for people with a learning disability; the main conclusion of which was that there
is a lack of clear evidence of what works. As an interim solution NHS England published a
document that set out, amongst other things, ways for the system to make reasonable
adjustments to ensure equity of access to services. NHS England made £1.5 million
available in 2014/15 to support the work required to establish a national learning disability
mortality review which will begin collecting data about the causes of premature mortality in
people with a learning disability with a view to identifying learning about ways of improving
outcomes for them in 2015/16.
5.86 NHS England has asked the Healthcare Quality Improvement Partnership (HQIP) to
commission the review as a National Clinical Audit Confidential Enquiry under the National
Clinical Audit and Patient Outcomes Programme. HQIP is in the process of tendering for a
preferred provider and we expect a national mortality review to be established during
2015/16. NHS England is undertaking preliminary work to scope options for improving
uptake of GP health checks for people with learning disabilities.
Making every contact count is a way of working that can make a real difference to people’s lives. The focus
might be on individuals losing weight, quitting smoking, reducing alcohol intake, or helping to reduce social
isolation – it’s about living well for longer. For those at the West Midlands Fire Service, it can mean:
 getting an elderly woman’s carpet replaced because there’s a real risk of her tripping;
 looking out for new squats on the way to and from work to have conversations with the homeless about fire
safety, and giving information on local services;
 climbing through someone’s window to have a chat about alcohol harm reduction because that was the only
way they would let you in; and
 working with a 15 year old with 30 or so arrests with the outcome that they stay in education, are now living
independently and don’t do the sorts of things anymore that got them arrested in the first place. 
Living Well for Longer: One year on, 2015
34
6. Next steps
6.1 One year after LWfL was published we find ourselves at a pivotal point of opportunity to
make real change across the system. We have the right organisations in place, newly
established mechanisms to support and collaborate with each other and clearly articulated
commitments to delivering a paradigm shift in how health care in its broadest sense is
delivered.
6.2 We are confident that the evidence based actions set out in this report will have had a
positive impact on reducing premature mortality. This is corroborated by the extensive
information included in this report setting out additional activity across the system. It is not
yet possible to identify the impact of these activities on overall mortality rates or
inequalities for a number of reasons.
6.3 Mortality statistics are volatile and notoriously difficult to interpret, not least because they
reflect a vast array of different factors that will come into play over the whole life course of
any individual. We will, however, continue to monitor mortality rates and health inequalities
over the longer term to help identify changes in future trends and take action accordingly.
6.4 There is a consensus on the areas we need to focus on to maximise the impact on the
health and care system and importantly, from this document’s perspective, on reducing
premature mortality and health inequalities. For example the work commissioned by NHS
England and DH from the European Health Observatory38
. We either know, or are building
the evidence base, on what works and are agreed about the benefits of working as a
broad coalition to implement the processes, services and systems.
6.5 With all aspects of this work, account needs to be taken of the different needs of different
communities and groups to ensure health inequalities are reduced, especially those
associated with premature mortality. Research39 tells us that while the proportion of the
population that engages in unhealthy behaviours has declined significantly in the past few
years these reductions have not been spread evenly across the population.
6.6 To improve the overall health of England and reduce the pressure on the NHS we need to
ensure that the actions we take particularly enable those at higher risk of unhealthy
behaviours, for example those in lower socio-economic groups, to live longer healthier
lives.

38 Reducing avoidable mortality in England: What can be done? Karanikolos M, Nolte E, Varsamis D, Ingham Clark
C, Bhogal J, and McKee M; Eurohealth, 20, 4, pp39-42 (December 2014)
http://www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_file/0011/266186/EuroHealth_v20n4.pdf?ua=1
39 Clustering of unhealthy behaviours over time: implications for policy and practice; (Aug 2012); Buck D and
Frosini F; The King’s Fund; http://www.kingsfund.org.uk/sites/files/kf/field/field_publication_file/clustering-ofunhealthy-behaviours-over-time-aug-2012.pdf
35
Shared system leadership
6.7 The 5YFV and From evidence into practice both highlight the need for the NHS and public
health to empower people to manage their own health more effectively in a range of ways
which dovetail and complement each other.
6.8 This will range from helping the public to engage with information about making healthy
choices through digital and mobile technology as well as continuing with the tried and
tested routes such as marketing campaigns. It includes improving the information that
people can readily access about diseases and interventions, linking into the existing work
on digital information. It also involves increasing the direct choice and control patients
have over their care in terms of what treatment they have and where, and the new
integrated personal commissioning to manage a ‘year of care’ budget for themselves.
6.9 Without a shared vision and collaborative working between the NHS and local authorities,
championing the individuals’ role in determining their health and wellbeing, this will not
become a reality.
6.10 The second area where shared leadership will be key is in the rise of place-based
approaches where local authorities lead their partners in health, public health and
elsewhere to develop local solutions that integrate services and ensure sustainability and
resilience. PHE are committed to develop an evidence base on community development
interventions.
6.11 NHS England has also identified the need to engage with communities and the public at a
more fundamental level, outside the routine provision of healthcare. The NHS has a
unique position of trust within communities and will be looking to extend its influence in
supporting carers, creating new options for health-related volunteering as well as making it
easier for voluntary sector organisations to work with the NHS. The NHS will also be
seeking to use its role as a major employer to lead the way in improving the health of its
population for example through its management of employees with mental health
conditions.
Accountability and transparency
6.12 The work on transparency will continue across the national organisations. There is a
shared willingness to make data and information on quality and performance available in
clear and meaningful ways that can be tailored to a variety of audiences.
6.13 DH is undertaking a programme of work to consider the future direction of the outcomes
frameworks (public health, NHS and adult social care), and how they can promote greater
alignment. This work aims to support commissioners, patients and the public, not only to
have access to this information on outcomes but to use and interpret it, so that they are
fully informed about the quality of care available to them.
Living Well for Longer: One year on, 2015
36
6.14 There is also an ongoing process to review and develop the MyNHS site with users,
professionals and organisations. Secretary of State sees this as a key mechanism to
embed the culture of transparency throughout the system. Future updates include a
commitment to provide information at a local authority level on the health and wellbeing of
their population which will provide context for the other health and care economy
information on the site.
Ensuring prevention is front and centre
6.15 Over the next 5 years, first and foremost there must be a focus on prevention. This is
clearly articulated by both NHS England and PHE in their forward plans but for the first
time the governance and mechanisms are being put in place to deliver collaboratively. The
NHS Prevention Programme Board will provide shared senior leadership and governance
and ensure these programmes of work are developed collaboratively. Reducing health
inequalities will be a particular focus.
6.16 The initial area of work for the programme is implementation of a national diabetes
prevention programme. PHE is working in partnership with NHS England and Diabetes UK
to implement the programme, as outlined in Evidence to Action and The Forward View into
Action40
. This work will involve assessing the evidence of what works, co-designing the
interventions and supporting the implementation of proven approaches to prevent
diabetes.
6.17 These interventions will be implemented in a small number of demonstrator sites in
2015/16 and evaluated before a planned national roll out in 2016/17. This will allow us to
achieve our aim ‘to be the first country to implement at scale a national evidence-based
diabetes prevention programme’
41
.
6.18 In addition, DH is looking to incentivise local authorities to make tangible progress against
key public health outcome indicators through the Health Premium Incentive scheme. A
pilot scheme in 2015/16 will share £5 million among those authorities that achieve real
improvement in drug misuse service outcomes and another indicator that they can choose
themselves to reflect their own local priorities. There will be a default indicator on the NHS
Health Check for those that don’t actively make a choice.
6.19 Perhaps most importantly is the recognition that the NHS itself needs to become a greater
agent for change in health-related social behaviours through:
 Incentivising and supporting healthier behaviours on things like drinking, smoking and
diet, using the purchasing power of the NHS to reinforce these measures. This will be
supported and underpinned by PHE’s use of behavioural science and digital and

40 The Forward View into Action: Planning for 2015/16; (Dec 2014); NHS England;
http://www.england.nhs.uk/ourwork/forward-view/
41 https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/366852/PHE_Priorities.pdf
37
mobile technology; enabling the system to personalise support at scale through new
approaches to motivate and support people to make healthy choices.
 Supporting local democratic leadership on public health through health and wellbeing
boards and supporting greater powers for local authorities in public health policy. This
will complement local authority led place-based approaches to develop local solutions
and resilient communities.
 Targeting secondary prevention, particularly through proactive, evidence based primary
care interventions which provide considerable scope to rapidly reduce health
inequalities42
. PHE will be developing a new preventative services programme with
NHS England. This will start with diabetes, assessing the evidence; designing
interventions that are proven will prevent disease and support implementation. This
work which is being taken forward in partnership with Diabetes UK will be a key
programme to deliver reductions both in premature mortality and disability and also to
demonstrate effective collaboration.
 Supporting people to get jobs and stay in employment, in particular looking at how
access to NHS services for those at risk of leaving work due to ill-health.
 Supporting employers to provide effective workplace health programmes for their staff,
starting with NHS Employers, encouraging NHS staff to act as health ambassadors in
their local communities.
6.20 There is an expectation that PHE will continue its work in widening the reach of the
Workplace Wellbeing Charter, an award scheme to promote workplace health, while
ensuring this is aligned with the Public Health Responsibility Deal Health at Work Network
pledges. PHE will also continue to build the evidence base and support DH in developing
policy in this area.
6.21 DH will continue to work to support efforts to reduce participation in risky behaviours,
taking account of their social distribution. In particular we will need to continue to work with
industry to improve public health. They have a significant role to play given their role as
employers, but also as producers and retailers of food and alcohol.
6.22 DH will also be working on the European Tobacco Products Directive, which must be
transposed in UK law by May 2016, will introduce a range of new tobacco control
measures, including a ban on flavourings such as menthol, larger health warnings, bring
an end to small packs of cigarettes and tobacco and introduce measures to counter illicit
trade in tobacco. The Directive will also introduce regulatory controls on electronic
cigarettes.

42 Tackling inequalities in life expectancy in areas with the worst health and deprivation; House of Commons
Committee of Public Accounts: Third Report of Session 2010–11;
http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201011/cmselect/cmpubacc/470/470.pdf
Living Well for Longer: One year on, 2015
38
Treatment: improving outcomes for patients
Mental health
6.23 Mental health was identified in LWfL as an area where health outcomes from the major
killer diseases are particularly poor. To help address this the recently published Mental
Health Act 1983; Code of Practice43 includes advice service providers can follow to better
look after the physical health of people suffering mental ill health. This recognises the huge
disparity in premature mortality rates for people suffering mental illness.
Cancer
6.24 International comparisons demonstrate that although incidence of cancer in the UK is
below the European average, there is a historically poor survival gap between the UK and
other parts of Europe. Most of this data is from patients diagnosed in 2007 or earlier and
we have made progress in England in improving outcomes since 2007.
6.25 A comparison of all-stage survival in 2012 with a baseline of 2004/07 shows increasing
survival across all cancer types44 and in the 2014 Fourth Annual Report on the Cancer
Outcomes Strategy45 we projected that, based on our current rate of improvement in
survival, 12,000 additional people diagnosed from 2011-2015 will survive their cancer for
five years compared to those diagnosed from 2006-2010. We would not claim that all the
improvement is down to actions set out in the strategy, but we do believe that these
actions have had a significant impact on cancer survival in this country and will continue to
do so.
6.26 Although this is good news, we know there is still more to do. There are still deep
inequalities and wide variation in outcomes from cancer across England, which
demonstrates that there is significant scope for improvement. This is why in January 2015
NHS England announced a new independent Cancer Taskforce to develop a new cancer
strategy which will focus on better prevention, quicker diagnosis, and better treatment,
care and aftercare for all those diagnosed with cancer.
6.27 The strategy will be published by the summer. If we are able to deliver the vision set out in
the 5YFV at sufficient pace and scale, NHS England believe that, over the next five years,
the NHS can deliver a 10% increase in those patients diagnosed at stage 1 and stage 2.
This is equivalent to about 8,000 more patients living longer than five years after
diagnosis.

43 Mental Health Act 1983: Code of Practice; (January 2015); Department of Health;
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/code-of-practice-mental-health-act-1983
44 1-year cancer survival increased from 59.7% for adults diagnosed in 1997 to 69.3% in 2012 and 5-year survival
increased from 41.9% for adults diagnosed in 1997 to 49.0% in 2008.
45 Improving Outcomes: A Strategy for Cancer – Fourth annual report (December 2014);
www.gov.uk/government/publications/the-national-cancer-strategy-4th-annual-report
39
6.28 NHS England also launched a major early-diagnosis programme, working jointly with
Cancer Research UK and Macmillan Cancer Support to test new approaches to identifying
cancer more quickly. Examples include self-referral for diagnostic tests, lowering the
threshold for GP referrals, and setting up multi-disciplinary diagnostic centres so patients
can have several tests done at the same place on the same day.
6.29 In addition, NHS England committed a further £15 million over three years to evaluate and
treat patients with a modern, more precise type of radiotherapy, stereotactic ablative
radiotherapy (SABR). This evaluation programme will mean a significant increase in the
number of cancer patients eligible to access SABR treatment by around 750 a year. The
programme will widen the number of cancers being treated by SABR, including cancer that
has spread to another part of the body. This new investment is in addition to NHS
England’s pledge to fund up to £6 million over the next five years to cover the NHS
treatment costs of SABR clinical trials, most of which are being led by Cancer Research
UK.
Liver disease
6.30 Liver disease is one area where we have not seen the improvements in mortality rates that
have been evident in the other major diseases. While the rates have broadly levelled off in
recent years liver disease is the third commonest cause of premature death in people of
working age, and continues to make a major contribution to premature mortality and health
inequalities. Mortality rates from liver disease are substantially higher in the UK than other
countries in Western Europe.
6.31 Alcohol, obesity and viral hepatitis are the main contributors to liver disease and, are
largely preventable risk factors. Work is underway to prevent liver disease through tackling
alcohol consumption and obesity which have been discussed earlier in this document.
Viral hepatitis, in particular hepatitis C, contributes to morbidity and premature mortality
from liver disease and liver cancer. On World Hepatitis Day (28 July 2014), PHE published
its annual report Hepatitis C in the UK46 summarising progress since the 2004 hepatitis C
action plan for England, but showing the continuing rise in serious liver disease due to
chronic hepatitis C infection.
6.32 PHE has also been working with NHS England and the voluntary sector to develop a
Hepatitis C Improvement Framework which aims to improve case-finding, prevention,
diagnosis and treatment programmes, especially for high-risk populations such as people
who inject drugs. The long term goal is reducing the burden of disease from end-stage
liver disease and liver cancer. This framework is due to be published in the spring. To
support commissioning of hepatitis C services, PHE also publishes a hepatitis C
commissioning template which helps commissioners estimate the local prevalence of

46 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/hepatitis-c-in-the-uk
Living Well for Longer: One year on, 2015
40
hepatitis C and the costs of treatment. Mathematical modelling47 suggests that access to
the new, more effective treatments for chronic infection have real potential to stem this
rise.
6.33 Hepatitis B infection, the other viral cause of chronic liver disease, can be effectively
prevented by vaccination. In October, the Joint Committee on Vaccination and
Immunisation48 recommended that a combination vaccination including hepatitis B should
be used in infants, provided that it could be procured at a cost effective price.
6.34 PHE is taking a number of additional actions to help tackle the condition. These include
developing a liver disease framework and publishing a report on children and young
person’s liver disease in addition to an updated report from the National End of Life Care
Intelligence Network on end of life care for people dying with liver disease, both of which
are expected later this spring. PHE has a strategic partnership working with the Lancet
Commission49 on liver disease on taking forward its recommendations.
6.35 PHE has also developed the information available to support commissioning decisions,
with publication of local authority liver disease profiles in November 2014. These were
designed for use by local authority Health and Wellbeing Boards and the evidence is that
they are being used widely. PHE will work with Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
to publish a report of the Global Burden of Disease 2013 model (for liver disease) with an
update for England compared with other countries, which will include analysis by English
region and by deprivation. During 2015/16, PHE will also produce an analysis of the
independent role of obesity in liver disease compared with alcohol and infections.
Acute kidney injury
6.36 Acute kidney injury (AKI) is seen in 13–18% of all people admitted to hospital, costing the
NHS between £434m and £620m per year and resulting in substantial numbers of
preventable deaths. To address this, NICE guidance50 was published in 2013 to foster
improvements in early intervention and highlight the importance of risk assessment and
prevention, early recognition and treatment in a variety of settings.
6.37 In 2015, ‘Think Kidneys’, the NHS programme for AKI, will commence measurement and
reporting across all providers and support improvement across England by providing
expertise to the Safety Collaborative and other initiatives to reduce harm associated with
AKI.

47 https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/hepatitis-c-in-the-uk
48 https://www.gov.uk/government/groups/joint-committee-on-vaccination-and-immunisation#minutes
49 Addressing liver disease in the UK: a blueprint for attaining excellence in health care and reducing premature
mortality from lifestyle issues of excess consumption of alcohol, obesity, and viral hepatitis; Williams et al;
(November 2014); http://www.britishlivertrust.org.uk/lancet-leading-experts-call-end-uk-postcode-lottery-liverdisease-treatment-detection/
50
 Acute kidney injury: Prevention, detection and management of acute kidney injury up to the point of renal
replacement therapy; (August 2013); NICE; https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg169
41
Sepsis
6.38 Sepsis claims over 37,000 lives every year in the UK which is more than lung cancer and
breast cancer combined51. It also costs the NHS around £20,000 for each hospital
admission52
.
6.39 Research shows that early recognition and intervention saves lives, estimates suggest as
many as 15,000 per year in the UK, reduces the time patients spend in hospital and is cost
effective. The Secretary of State’s recent focus and the publication of information on
patient safety53 is an important step in challenging the system to do more on sepsis and
other risks to good treatment and care.
6.40 NHS England has set up a cross-system Sepsis Programme Board to bring together work
being undertaken by various bodies on early recognition and treatment of sepsis. Among
other things HEE is developing educational materials, NHS England has developed a
CQUIN to reward rapid recognition and treatment of severe sepsis in patients admitted to
hospital as emergencies, and work is going on in liaison with the Academy of Medical
Royal Colleges to enable audit and improvement in sepsis management in primary and
secondary care.
Diabetes
6.41 Diabetes is a major risk factor for premature mortality, contributing to over 22,000
additional deaths each year as well as health inequalities. Having diabetes doubles the
risk of cardiovascular disease (heart attacks, heart failure, angina and strokes) and it is
often accompanied by other long-term conditions.
6.42 Estimates suggest that diabetes costs approximately 10% of the total expenditure on
health with approximately 80% of those costs incurred in treating potentially avoidable
complications. There have been improvements in the quality of NHS care for people with
or at risk of diabetes which has led to improvements in health and care outcomes as well
as mortality among people with diabetes54
.
6.43 However, there is more to be done to improve outcomes and patient experience and in
2014 NHS England published their Action for Diabetes55. This set out the actions they are
taking over the next few years to improve outcomes for adults with and at risk of diabetes.

51 UK Sepsis Trust, accessed 12 February 2015,
https://www.facebook.com/TheUkSepsisTrust/info?ref=page_internal
52 Time to act - Severe sepsis: rapid diagnosis and treatment saves lives; Appendix 2: invited evidence from the UK
Sepsis Trust; (September 2013); Parliamentary and Health Service Ombudsman;
http://www.ombudsman.org.uk/time-to-act/glossary-and-appendices/appendix-2-invited-evidence-from-the-uksepsis-trust
53 http://www.nhs.uk/NHSEngland/thenhs/patient-safety/Pages/patient-safety-indicators.aspx
54 Action for Diabetes; NHS England; (January 2014); http://www.england.nhs.uk/ourwork/qual-clin-lead/action-fordiabetes/
55 ibid
Living Well for Longer: One year on, 2015
42
These include the development of a sample service specification for services to support
CCGs to put in place appropriate services for their populations; this is now available on the
NHS Commissioning Assembly website56
.
6.44 In addition, NHS England is working with Diabetes UK and the Association of British
Clinical Diabetologists on a national root cause analysis project. Acute trusts have
volunteered to participate in the project which is currently collecting data on adverse
inpatient events in those with diabetes, including mortality. The results will help inform
future inpatient care and will be presented at the Diabetes UK Annual Professional
Conference in March 2015.
Self care
6.45 The 5YFV highlights the fact that over a quarter of the population in England have at least
one long term condition and increasing numbers having multiple conditions. It estimates
that approximately 70% of health and social care spending is targeted towards those 15
million people. As a consequence, managing those needs in an effective, joined up
manner is now central to the role of the NHS.
6.46 The 5YFV recognises that even patients with long term conditions probably spend less
than one percent of their time in contact with health professionals. The rest of the time they
manage on their own. There is good evidence that patients who receive services that are
tailored to their needs and circumstances, and who have the skills and support needed to
manage their own care, experience health, better outcomes and fewer costly episodes of
unplanned care. The 5YFV therefore makes a key commitment to do more to support
people with long term conditions to manage their own health and care.
6.47 NHS England has recently launched the Realising the Value Programme which will identify
key evidence based approaches to care which empowers patients and engages
communities (such as self-management and peer support) and develop tools to support
their implementation across the NHS and local communities. This work will include testing
with local communities, and will give consideration to culture and systems barriers, to
enable greater implementation of self-management and person centred care in addition to
developing a methodology for assessing the costs and benefits.
6.48 Other areas of activity to promote self-care include the Patient Activation Measure (PAM)
learning set. As part of this, five CCGs and the UK Renal Registry are currently testing the
use of the PAM, to help assess an of individual’s motivation, alongside their skills,
knowledge and confidence to manage and make decisions about their own health and
care. This work will be evaluated and will offer learning on how the PAM can support a
personalised approach to care and self-management.

56http://www.commissioningassembly.nhs.uk/pg/dashboard 
43
6.49 In addition to this, NHS England is conducting a survey to test clinician support (CS) for
patient activation. The CS PAM questionnaire has been supported by a number of Royal
Colleges, and over 1800 clinicians have responded. Analysis of the data is currently
ongoing. The results will help to understand how clinicians perceive their role in supporting
patient self-management, the issues and barriers they face, and any additional support
they may need.
6.50 Finally, the Coalition for Collaborative Care was established in 2014 and brings together
an alliance of people and organisations committed to achieving person-centred,
collaborative care. NHS England and the Coalition recently published the Personalised
Care and Support Planning Handbook57 on care and support planning for people with long
term conditions. The Handbook is designed to help commissioners and practitioners turn
the aspiration of improved personalised care and support for people with long term
conditions into a reality; moving from providing single, unconnected episodes of care to
working in partnership with patients over the long term.
New models of care
6.51 The 5YFV acknowledges that future developments will not be about disease or group
specific services but about different models and networks of care. The way services are
provided in primary care, community services and hospitals is often an important factor in
delivering coordinated and person centred care.
6.52 Over the next few years, as set out in the Forward View into Action58
, NHS England will be
working with innovative providers and commissioners to support development, evaluation
and ensure the new care models provide the best experience for patients and value for
money. To do this, twenty nine ‘vanguard’ sites were selected on 10 March to take the
lead on the development of new care models. The aim is to transform how care is

57 Personalised Care and Support Planning Handbook; NHS England;
http://www.england.nhs.uk/resources/resources-for-ccgs/out-frwrk/dom-2/ltc-care/
58 The Forward View into Action: Planning for 2015/16; (Dec 2014); NHS England;
http://www.england.nhs.uk/ourwork/forward-view/
Enabling people with a long term condition to manage their own health on a day to day basis improves the
experience of care as well as improving outcomes. There is a wide range of tools to aid self care, including:
 Diabetes UK’s ‘Living with Diabetes’ days (http://www.diabetes.org.uk/How_we_help/Living-withDiabetes-Days/).
These are run across the country and provide advice on maintaining a healthy diet and
becoming more confident in managing their diabetes day to day. For more one to one support there is
peer support which puts people in touch with someone who knows first-hand what it’s like to live with
diabetes (http://www.diabetes.org.uk/How_we_help/Peer-Support/).
 My Stroke Guide (http://mystrokeguide.com/) is a self-management tool to support people who have
been affected by stroke. It was designed by The Stroke Association with stroke survivors and carers, and
provides practical tools to help them understand stroke and deal with its effects alongside peer support to
combat feelings of isolation.
 The British Lung Foundation’s COPD Patient Passport (http://passport.blf.org.uk/) uses a step by step
approach to help patients discuss, understand and manage their condition better.
Living Well for Longer: One year on, 2015
44
delivered locally and act as the blue prints for the NHS moving forward. NHS England will
work with local vanguard sites to develop dedicated support packages, and help in
overcoming barriers and building capability to enable and accelerate change in ways that
can be replicated elsewhere. The programme will be backed by a £200 million
Transformation Fund.
6.53 The three areas for redesign include:
 Integrated Primary and Acute Care Systems – joining up GP, hospital, community and
mental health services;
 Multispecialty Community Providers – moving specialist care out of hospitals into the
community;
 Enhanced health in care homes – offering older people better, joined up health, care
and rehabilitation services.
Looking to the future
6.54 The vision started and articulated by the Secretary of State in 2013 is now embedded in
the plans and priorities of NHS England and PHE. There is a common understanding of
the direction of travel, and a shared commitment to deliver.
6.55 The health and care reforms have put the right organisations in the right places. As
envisaged, they have provided a more devolved system that is able, supported by NHS
England and PHE, to deliver responsive and tailored services to meet local needs,
including on reducing early deaths.
6.56 LWfL played an important role in initiating the new system’s drive towards improving
outcomes for the people of England. It set out for all the scale of the challenge and
highlighted the themes of early diagnosis, treatment, and shone the spotlight on
prevention. It is now time to step back and let the system as a whole, as well as each
component part, do its work; while Government continues to undertake the actions only it
can carry out, including providing the framework within which the health and care system
works which recognises the importance of reducing premature mortality.
6.57 It is also essential that NHS England, local NHS bodies, PHE and local authorities
continue to build on progress, ensuring that the priorities of prevention, early diagnosis and
effective, evidence based treatments are normalised in all future policy developments.
3.14 Shared leadership and recognising where there are common system goals is fundamental
to successful progress. NHS England and PHE have established clear structures and
governance around common areas of interest with plans on how they will work together on
cross-cutting themes.
3.15 Greater availability of accessible local information will stimulate self-improvement rather
than relying on common centrally driven performance targets. Increasing transparency will
mean localities have meaningful data and information to judge performance as well as 
45
hold organisations and professionals to account for the quality of their services and local
outcomes.
6.58 For the future, DH will continue to consider the evidence on delivering high quality, cost
effective health and care. We will work with our partners to evaluate what actions are
required by the system to generate those improvements and hold partners to account to
deliver those changes. We will remain an active partner in the coalition of effort across the
system and will still play a key role in supporting the system at all levels to do what is
necessary to reduce premature mortality and move us towards being amongst the best in
Europe by 2020.