About Smoke-Free Ontario
The Smoke-Free Ontario Strategy has greatly reduced tobacco use and lowered health risks to non-smokers in Ontario.

The Strategy combines programs, policies, laws and public education to:

help smokers quit
protect people from exposure to second-hand smoke
encourage young people to never start
Learn more about programs to help you quit

The law
By law, you cannot smoke or hold lighted tobacco in any enclosed workplace, any enclosed public places and specifically designated outdoor places in Ontario.

If you smoke or hold lighted tobacco in a place where it has been prohibited, you may be ticketed and charged a fine.

All employers, owners and operators of such facilities must:

post "No Smoking" signs at all entrances, exits, washrooms and anywhere signs can be easily placed and seen
make sure that no one smokes or holds lighted tobacco in an enclosed workplace, public place, or area where smoking is banned
make sure that a person who does not comply leaves the premises
remove ashtrays (or any object that serves as one)
Local public health units carry out inspections and respond to complaints to enforce the act.

Source law
You can find the complete set of rules related to the smoking ban in:

Smoke-Free Ontario Act
Ontario Regulation 48/06
Rules on where you can’t smoke
It’s illegal to smoke in:

Outdoor patios
All bar and restaurant outdoor patios (covered or uncovered) must be smoke-free. Uncovered patios established by a branch of the Royal Canadian Legion, or another veteran’s organization before November 18, 2013 are exempt.

If you operate a bar or restaurant and want to make sure your patio meets the rules, please contact your local public health unit for help.

Find your local public health unit

Child care facilities
Any child care centre licensed under the Child Care and Early Years Act, 2014 must be smoke-free.

For a places where home child care is provided within the meaning of the Child Care and Early Years Act, 2014 ,the place must be smoke-free at all times — even if children are not present. This includes any outdoor spaces used by the children.

Motor vehicles with children inside
You must not light or use a tobacco product in a motor vehicle with anyone inside under 16 years of age. The law applies to both moving and parked vehicles – even if a window, sunroof, rooftop, door, or other feature of the vehicle is open.

Enclosed workplaces
The law protects employees from exposure to second-hand smoke in an enclosed workplace. The ban on smoking in these places applies at all times, even when not open for business.

An enclosed workplace means:

the inside of a building, structure or vehicle that an employee works in or frequents during the course of their employment whether or not they are acting in the course of the employment at the time
this includes the inside of a trailer office on a construction site, the inside of a loading dock, or the inside of a delivery truck
common areas such as washrooms, lobbies and parking garages
An employer may not dismiss, threaten to dismiss, discipline, suspend, penalize, intimidate or coerce an employee who follows the act or seeks compliance with it.

If your employer takes any of these steps, you may complain to the Ontario Labour Relations Board:

call toll-free at 1-877-339-3335
visit the Ministry of Labour website
Smoking Shelters
You cannot smoke in an outdoor smoking shelter that has more than 2 walls and a roof.

Areas where home health care workers work
A home health care worker is a person who provides health care or support services in private homes that is provided or arranged by either:

a Community Care Access Centre
an entity that is funded by the Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care or a local health integration network
These workers have the right to ask clients not to smoke in their presence. If the person refuses to comply, the worker can leave. They do not have to provide services.

In these cases, the home health care worker must

notify their employer as soon as possible
follow any guidelines the employer provides
ensure the client is safe
provide information about the conditions and needs of the client over the next 24 hours
Hospitals (public, private and psychiatric facility)
You must not smoke or hold lighted tobacco on the outdoor grounds of a hospital – except where a designated smoking area is available. You must also not smoke  – and within a 9 metre radius of any entrance or exit of a hospital.

A hospital can choose to provide a designated smoking area outdoors if it:

has no more than two walls and a roof
is located outside a 9 metre radius of any entrance or exit
is identified as a smoking area with one or more signs posted on or around the smoking area
All designated smoking areas will be temporary. Starting January 1, 2018, all outdoor grounds of hospitals must be completely smoke-free.

A hospital cannot sell tobacco products.

Common areas of hotels, motels and inns
The only place you may smoke in hotels, motels and inns are guest rooms designated as smoking rooms. Designated smoking guest rooms must be fully enclosed. Only registered guests and their invited guests can smoke in designated guest rooms.

Owners and employees must:

fully comply with the act if offering smoking guest rooms
follow the rules for enclosed public places in all other areas of the hotel, motel or inn
Smoking is not allowed on or around playgrounds at hotels, motels and inns.

Multi-unit residences
You must not smoke in any common areas of condos, apartment buildings or college and university residences. Examples of common areas include:

elevators
stairwells
hallways
parking garages
laundry facilities
lobbies
exercise areas
party or entertainment rooms
Residential care facilities
You must not smoke in residential care facilities. They are considered both an enclosed public place and an enclosed workplace. However, some residential care facilities may choose to construct and operate a controlled smoking area for residents to smoke. These include:

long-term care or retirement homes or publicly funded supportive housing residences
certain psychiatric facilities
certain veterans' facilities
A residential care facility must have its controlled smoking area approved by and registered with the Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care.

Exemption: Aboriginal people
If you are an Aboriginal person and reside in a public or private hospital, psychiatric facility, long-term care home, home for special care or independent health facility, you may request an indoor area to use tobacco for traditional cultural or spiritual purposes. This area must be separate from any Controlled Smoking Area.

Schools (public and private school property)
You cannot smoke or hold lighted tobacco inside the building of any public or private school, or on any outdoor property used by the school. This includes playgrounds and sports fields.

Children’s playgrounds and publicly owned sports fields
It is illegal to smoke on and within 20 metres of children’s playgrounds and publicly owned sport fields and surfaces (e.g., areas for basketball, baseball, soccer or beach volleyball, ice rinks, tennis courts, splash pads and swimming pools that are owned by a municipality, the province or a postsecondary education institution)

Rules for selling tobacco
Rules for colleges and universities
It is illegal to sell tobacco on university and college campuses, including buildings that are owned and areas that are leased by a postsecondary institution or student union.

Rules for duty-free retailers
Duty-free retailers may:

show a countertop tobacco display
allow customers to handle tobacco products before they make a purchase
All duty-free retailers must fully comply with the law. For example, they must:

ensure that tobacco products and accessories are not visible from outside the place of business
not allow people to enter the shop from another store
not force people to walk through the shop to access other stores
Duty-Free Retailers must post certain signs such as:

No Smoking signs at all entrances, exits, washrooms and other appropriate places to ensure that everyone knows that smoking is prohibited
Age Restriction and Health Warning and Government I.D. signs in stores at the point of sale and where it is clearly visible to customers
To learn more about these signs, please contact your local public health unit.

Rules for manufacturer outlets
Manufacturers registered with the Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care are exempt from the prohibitions relating to display and promotion of tobacco products in a place where tobacco products are manufactured, fabricated and produced.\

If you are under 19 years of age, you may not enter a manufacturer outlet unless accompanied by somebody who is at least 19.

Resources for selling tobacco products (PDFs)
Download Frequently asked questions
Frequently asked questions:
English
French
Bengali
Chinese
Gujarati
Korean
Urdu
Fact sheet for tobacco vendors:
English
French
Bengali
Chinese
Gujarati
Korean
Urdu
Resources for selling cigarillos (PDFs)
Download Resources for making and selling cigarillos
Frequently asked questions:
English
French
Bengali
Chinese
Gujarati
Korean
Urdu
Get signs for stores/public places
Contact your local public health unit to get:

no smoking signs
age restriction signs
health warning signs
Learn more about required signs

Apply for a tobacco retail permit
Visit the Ministry of Finance for more information
Download the application form for tobacco retail dealer's permit (PDF)
Follow the instructions on page 4 of the form
Mail the completed form to:
Ministry of Finance
33 King St W
PO Box 625
Oshawa ON  L1H 8H9

Smoke-Free facts
each year, tobacco claims 13,000 lives in Ontario — that equals 36 lives every day
tobacco-related disease costs Ontario’s health care system an estimated $2.2 billion in direct health care costs
it also costs an extra $5.3 billion in indirect costs such as time off work
Ontario’s smoking rate dropped from 24.5 per cent in 2000 to 17.4% in 2014, meaning 408,257 fewer smokers
Updated: June 16, 2016
Published: November 7, 2014
Related information
Related  
Public Health Ontario

Healthy choices

Healthy Canadians – Smoking and Tobacco

Smoke-Free Ontario training for retailers

Rate
I like this pageI don't like this page
Topics
Health and wellness
Back to top
Topics
 Arts and culture
 Business and economy
 Driving and roads
 Education and training
 Environment and energy
 Government
 Health and wellness
 Home and community
 Jobs and employment
 Law and safety
 Rural and north
 Taxes and benefits
 Travel and recreation
Contact Us
Contact Us
Follow Us
Follow us on Facebook
Follow us on Twitter
Follow us on YouTube
Health care options
You've got health care options nearby, get to know them better. Find a service.

about Ontario
accessibility
news
privacy
terms of use
© Queen’s Printer for Ontario, 2012‑16

